The mystic monogram, O. E.
But were it not immoral I
Imagine! Here alone am I!
Another! to none other I
But with her elder sister I
But who abandon it--as I
Enough! with tranquil spirit I
Fair source of every fine idea,
At last the author!" cries Mamma.
But sudden fear assailed Tattiana,
And silent as the maid Svetlana
And I, remembering Svetlana,
Bouyanoff whisked off Poustiakova.
Each other as the shore we climb!
And lo! where lies a marble tomb
He writes upon his parents' tomb,
And oft its Dictionary thumb.
He oft upon his lips would curb,
He found them in an almanac,
And Virtue acts as a narcotic,
And triumphs in career erotic.
Above the ashes of the dead.
Ah! than a spectre from the dead
And soon Lel hovered o'er her head.
His shop, a night-cap on his head,
All silently hung down his head.
And gently hovered o'er my head?
For patience, reader, I must plead!
But on the third of grove and mead
But ah! discerns nor wood nor mead--
Do not excuse yourself. I read
And pauses oft to serve out bread.
For on their brows I trembling read
And lessons to his children read.
But presently she tried to read;
A little farther please to read
And two old pines their branches spread--
For the impatient chief instead.
And cool sagacious mind he had:
A new world was made manifest!Although we know that Eugene had
But Lenski, I should be so glad
Could taste the pleasures of the road.
Grant that I err not on the road."
An idle anchorite and sad,
At seven in summer rose from bed,
Aroused Tattiana from her bed.
Beneath the window-sill his bed,
And finally, upon his bed
Bear gone--she at the threshold placed;
Eugene in hackney carriage placed.
Except one by the window placed
Beneath her downy pillow placed,
At Larina's abode produced
All overtures of friendship ended.
And cares not farther to proceed;
But I perceive thou dost not heed--"
"Enough, arise! for much we need
Had run across her path at speed,
From the moist cork the bottle freed
And all with one accord agreed,
Alone she gallops on her steed,
But the date subsequently changed
By visions who was ne'er deranged
A careless looker-on estranged
A breathless silence then, prolonged--
And bitter tears of fright I shed.
And long perukes hath vanished.
Drive out the cattle from their shed,
And in society might shed
Customs by ages sanctified,
A visionary mortified,
But in his heart dissatisfied,
And ringing wine-glasses are plied.
And a new diadem supplied.
By a rich pie were occupied--
And not a speck of dirt descried.
Delusions of a mind untried,
And a long time about her talked.
By melancholy fogs concealed.
And such unconsciously he led,
A hermit's life Oneguine led,
He conversation would have led--
But, I acknowledge, from them fled;
Cried the old dame with anguish filled:
And with remorseful anguish filled,
As if with eider-down is filled.
And heard a voice cry--_Why! He's killed!_--
A gambling troop when he controlled,
A life of fact, not fiction, led--
By Faublas in his youth was schooled,
And to the field of honour led;
And in her conversation drawled.
But since to the backdoor they led
But kindness from his eye had beamed
And when the watery mirror gleamed
As if some troubled dream she dreamed.
A few of different temper deemed,
But one buffoon unhappy deemed
Both natural and truthful seemed.
And endless the cotillon seemed
A notoriety proclaimed,
Because my lord, in battles maimed,
And he who, jealousy disarmed,
And vows will probably be signed:
Caricatures he now designed
Because a member I became.Once more to idleness consigned,
Have e'er a precious tress consigned,
A happy destiny ordained:
A valuable hostage gained,
A modern Regulus unchained,
And saying this Vladimir drained
A something somehow have obtained,
At fifty who relief obtained
Hath tranquilly in turn attained,
And handsome countenance combined,
A tender couplet he combined,
At first for books was disinclined,
And on the last one, underlined:
Anticipating woe she pined,
Certain misfortune near opined.
Constant affection intertwined
Alarm the winter journey gave.The date was fixed though oft postponed,
A spirit which for sorrow yearned.
A countenance perplexed and scared.
An explanation: she was scared,
Another with cock's head appeared,
But Adam Smith to read appeared,
A faithful model she appeared
But this a heinous crime appeared
But in the drawing-room all appeared
And Tania's husband soon appeared.--
For evermore had disappeared.
Asunder was and hate prepared?
And they the waters recommend.He went not--sooner was prepared
Both ducks and geese in plenty bred
And many another slily sneered;
Extinct the flame which once had fired;
By indolence and languor fired
And both of dull existence tired,
An ace at fifteen paces bored.
Either she saw not or ignored;
And harmony was soon restored.
Contented and with victuals stored,
Deeming himself a veteran scarred
And what she from the cards inferred.
As Saadi anciently averred--
And by a partial temper stirred
And by a genuine sorrow stirred,
At first, but soon became inured
A marriageable maid matured,
And leaning 'gainst the portal closed
And Flianoff, somewhat indisposed,
But he who by the Muse was nursed
Alas! for now before her passed
At times three words to him addressed
And when I prayer to Heaven addressed
But sits in bed with air depressed,
Are not with elegance impressed.
And kindness Tania was impressed,
And thoughts of Olga first impressed
Ever by adverse fate oppressed,
Bullets are down the barrels pressed,
Delighted, almost sane in mind.But once more pensive and distressed
A deadly pallor, air distressed;
But tremor still her frame possessed,
By friendship how they were abused,
Bouyanoff courted. She refused.
And though her soul might be confused,
A book at early morn perused.
By daily life deteriorated,
But man of sense and probity.He might his motives have narrated,
Awhile this beauty captivated,
Hath she a fitting phrase selected?
And life and fate in turn selected
A bastard fame prohibited?
By Olga's hand distributed
And every year distributed
All mothers their sweet girls believed
And she at last hath us deceived;
At an old aunt's they had arrived
Harnessed the rapid sledge arrived:
A new proprietor arrived,
And ditties of the steppe she loved.
Already by repentance moved
And as a country damsel roved,
And these the attentive maid observed
And ancient usages observed
For first "madame" his wants observed,
And soon the friendly troop hath fled.They in a peaceful life preserved
A mien unaltered she preserved,
But Eugene was by fate preserved,
But proudly in his song preserved
And when her violence reviewed--
Et cetera_; but nothing showed
A scant attendance Lenski showed
And privileges nice allowed,
Enraptured was he if allowed
And necessary fools allowed.
Having a trusty staff bestowed,
At prisoner's base she never played.
All sons of mental weariness.Eight rubbers were already played,
And when for Olga nurse arrayed
Change of position had essayed,
And is all light within destroyed?
Again imagination blazed,
And "Agathon" replied, amazed.
And vehemently though amazed
For which the poet agonized
And many a day thereafter laid
And, hanging down her head, the maid
Beneath her parents' eyes the maid
At early morn returns the maid
And for Tattiana, mournful maid,
Alone with my Venetian maid,
For shame lift up the modest maid.
Fortune the poet had repaid.
Bruin is marching at her back!She, to turn back her eyes afraid,
Gazing into his face, she said:
And the old nurse a brief prayer said
But finally she softly said:
And spectacles, his knitting staid
Better than Chateaubriand did
A ball he fell as Tchatzki did.
Had rendered him an invalid;
As one who bivouacs afield,
And thus in season the rich field
Gay flowers and luscious fruit doth yield.
And can it be? But late a child
An ardent heart and yet so mild?--
And now a fickle flirt and wild,
Blank, unapproachable and cold.
But cannot stand the northern cold.
And frosty as a Twelfth Night cold.
And Limburg cheese alive and old
But that Princess Pauline of old,
Afar, where clothed in green and gold
Before it ran a stream. Behold!
Alas! she is as hard, behold,
And the suspicious veteran old,
An almanac but eight years old.
Had killed me had the like been told."
And the young ladies fortunes told,
A journey to Moscow! To see the world!
Heard he the truth? And thus she could--
Exist--that their immortal band
A weary season was at hand--
Friends of the sons of every land,
And in the bathroom did command
Gazing on Lenski's corse did stand--
At each extreme one takes his stand,
A passionate desire to bend
And had with waddling in the end
Charms more enduring in the end.
And thou, persistent to the end,
But thou, Bordeaux, art like the friend
Are admirable, my dear friend,
And farewell thou, my gloomy friend,
And, sobbing at your feet, to blend
An ear to my confession lend;
All to the doctors Eugene send,
"Enough to see one winter's end;
Assistance ever will extend,
And what will Destiny concede?"Farther Tattiana's walks extend--
But finally in wedlock bind.
But what astonished do I find
Fresh cause of quarrel then I'll find,
Beyond this may attempt to write_.Infallibly you there will find
But trembles, words he cannot find,
And all in snow is buried deep.The wood she enters--bear behind,--
A fiery and eccentric mind,
A duellist of classic mind,
Had perished a creative mind,
From mere vacuity of mind
But soon their choice seemed to her mind
Become alarmed. So never mind!
But one thought only filled his mind,
A pair; though desolate my mind,
And the recesses of my mind
And stoves of various shapes abound.
Funeral amateurs abound!
By barren snow heaped up and bound,
A stream, by winter's ice unbound,
A beau is for Tattiana found!
And if Tattiana mine had found--
From hence engrossed in thought profound
Examined, mended, newly found
Baggage is heaped up in a mound,
Endless conjectures all propound
And secretly their views expound.
But suddenly all changed around!
And from the country all around
A tangled wilderness around.
But, when Oneguine's turn came round,
And leave a marsh the fertile ground
And flooded all the level ground.
Amid the snowdrifts which surround
And her upon the threshold laid.Recovering, Tania gazes round;
And by the fiddle's rushing sound
Attentive to the echoing sound,
Amid coquettes who pray to God
Debate commanded ample food--
Assemble from the neighbourhood:
And spur my spirit's torpid mood!
Absorbed in melancholy mood
But such is not for me. I brood
Guillot behind a pollard stood;
At this time almost understood.
A village and beneath, a wood,
Dark was the valley and the wood
And abject slaves who kiss the rod;
A worshipper of Kant, a bard,
But ye to whom, when friendship heard,
And hark! the clank of spurs is heard
And ought he not to disregard
A young and handsome galliard.
Beneath her lay a strange courtyard,
Believed, the people's wisdom weird,
Epistle second, note the third,
Command him not to say a word--
Each gust of temper, silly word,
And never hath our language proud
Amazed at the confusing crowd,
Before a cold indifferent crowd,
And I, amid the friendly crowd,
But what a nuisance it will be,
Feelings which long had ceased to be
And this fifth canto ought to be
As lordly mansions ought to be,
As many entertainments be!
"Do not--you might--suspicious be;
And physic bring with mournful face,
But gazes on Oneguine's face
Depicted on your haughty face!
Bright blazed the window of the place,
And then "monsieur" supplied her place;
Hard by the window took her place."--
Drank to her health in the first place,
And after them at headlong pace
At the front gates, but in brief space
Accelerates her hasty pace,
Hallo, Andriushka, onward race!
An ancient lady full of grace.--
He called to mind Tattiana's grace,
A print without the picture's grace,
Callous to all he seemed to be.Ye miracles of courtly grace,
And who the rent-roll of his race
For there he left a mournful trace.
And my Eugene the path must trace--
Behold! than polished floor more nice
A blessed bottle, placed in ice,
A noted fop who gambled hard.Like his, her dress was always nice,
But wherefore not?--'Tis pleasant, nice,
Euphonious, though I know a spice
And the extent of his caprice;
And shall adopt some new caprice.
"Bring dinner now without delay!"Upon the table in a trice
But contrary to her advice
And his strange conduct at the dance
Again in her ethereal dance?
Before him her wild game of chance.
Can scarce in sweetness be a match.Well, if your pistol ball by chance
God grant that all who herein glance,
A pensive sorrow in her glance
Frequent and rapid doth his glance
Free scope he yields unto his glance,
And in her hand a French romance.
Canto the First of this romance.
A lethargy of sense, a trance,
A loaded pistol in his hand."Advance!"--
And views amongst themselves advance
And natural benevolence,
And aimless journeys did commence--
Habit would bring indifference.
But this adventure's consequence
And the newcomers welcome bade.
And yet oblivion forbade.
As in a thicket's humble shade,
Beneath the sheltering oak tree's shade
As to a worthy man and good!But sad is the reflection made,
But no reply unto her made.
For our amusement ever made
A certain little escapade
Choosing a profitable trade,
But cannot anyhow evade
For ever faithful will abide."
Doubt and uncertainty decide:
But I am now another's bride--
A lean and shaggy nag doth ride,
Amid the soulless sons of pride
A bearded postillion astride
But now all doubt was set aside,
And soon Oneguine's door beside
A pair of bullets--nought beside--
And hastened to his uncle's side,
But grown familiar side by side
Found them in darkness side by side,
Ate Russian pancakes at Shrovetide,
Always together, eventide
Beneath her roaring opened wide:
And death before the husband wide
And the saloon threw open wide;
And unto whom we all allude
Deep in the distant province rude,
Beneath the flag of Quietude,
Before whom once in solitude,
Daily of love in solitude.
Before he eighteen years attained.Since Eugene in that solitude
Fly frequent to my solitude,
Displayed a noble rectitude--
From henceforth I confide to thee!
Hath fate apportioned unto thee
By Providence's dark decree!
From such digressions wholly free.
And a guitar produced we see,
Behind the mill. Meantime ye see
Gallop, mazurka, waltzing--see!
But nought for this Tattiana cares.The break of day she doth not see,
A mansion--by the window, see!
Childe Harold, quaker, devotee,
Commence a new career in life
And like his shadow dogged his life,
And leads a solitary life?
By every proper-minded wife,
Dreamed in the future man and wife.
By children and by faithful wife
But now ridiculous a bit.Behold Sabouroff, whom the age
But at a later, sterile age,
And testy gamesters do engage
And reached, with nought his mind to engage,
Another could her heart engage,
A visionary personage
As once, to fill the rapid page
As storms which in chill autumn rage
As the reflection of his age,
Another could her woe assuage
Both aunts looked knowing as a judge,
Each gave Tattiana's arm a nudge
But sweeter still it is to arrange
For savage speech, uncouth and strange,
Again a century should scourge
For empty sound the rascal swore he
A paragon of virtue he!
All are amazed; but Lenski he
And by a sweet delusion he
And in her native language she
And a half rubles down gave she;
And cried within myself: 'tis he!
And disappear in space; then she
And an encouragement did breathe
A dying man with art to soothe,
Dressed like a London dandy he
Before you agonized to die--
And silently I here must die--
Contemplate her sad reverie.
Dark, unavailing reverie,
Aroused in him sweet reverie.
Acquaintance instantly to make.
E'en as the presence of a snake,
Great sacrifices for his sake!
For law I _far niente_ take
And every morning I awake
By computation) it is like
A bogy conjured up in joke,
And barely visible the smoke
He bowed to her nor silence broke,
And Lenski followed--a light broke--
By Tania, smoothing his peruke,
But it grew late; cold blew the gale;
Already sings the nightingale.
But now in her effulgence pale
Entranced me by some mystic tale.
Approach, approach; I am thine own."Thus in a style _obscure_ and _stale_,
Fashion is there immutable,
And loves you as--a relative!Ahem! Ahem! My reader noble,
Ere crimson stains their hands defile,
Because I should be sure, meanwhile,
Espying, Eugene with a smile
As rosy lips without a smile,
Cannot they amicably smile
But he desired not to beguile
Also the works of Fontenelle,
About the rain and flax and cattle."--
But will not modify a tittle--
Careless of every social rule,
Avenge himself in proper style.
A novel in Lafontaine's style,
And a romance in ancient style
Hateful the hollow world became,
From Gottingen inspired he came,
And straight returning whence he came,
"And is it long since back he came?
By "belle Tattiana" to replace.Lo! from the nearest barrack came,
But when the winter season came
Athwart the snow four paces came--
But turn we once more to our dame.
And comfort of each country dame,
And at the altar of their fame
By recklessness amuse or shame
Believe me, of my present shame
By love's inevitable flame.
And gazed around with eyes of flame;
But fashionable hatred's flame
And so Tattiana was her name,
A finished madrigal would frame
Another passed; 'twas just the same.
And fled afar--she followed me.
And my romance's open theme
And then the stanzas of my theme
Descends the bank with care extreme,
And, inspiration firing me,
And visit many a foreign clime,
Destroyed the blossom of his prime.
For a protracted space of time.
And thus he spent eight years of time,
Announcing to him dinner-time.
By time
And may fall headlong any time.
Despair and anger seize on me,
Across her youth a shade had come,
All dark and silent hath become;
Callous to all on earth become--
And shorter had the days become.
At eventide would hither come,
As in her heart the thought sank home,
An album, fly-leaf of the tome,
"Ah! come, Tattiana, come to me!
But I--what is all this to me?
But Lord! from friends deliver me!
But shall depict the touching scene
Doth seem to him the festal scene.
Adorned the apartment of Eugene,
All this was novel to Eugene.
Could not eclipse her neighbour's light."And is it," meditates Eugene.
And so departed. But Eugene,
A true Childe Harold my Eugene
Between myself and my Eugene,
As a poetic life serene,
And irrigate them with champagne;
Are turned upon her. All combine
Behold the dames who once were fine
A single being: 'twas in fine
Admired his judgment, which was fine,
Clarissa, Julia, Delphine,--
And make a dark existence shine
"Aline!"
Diminishes as years decline.
Do all things which to mirth incline.
Akulka who was once Celine,
Hath pictured in his gorgeous line
Baptized Prascovia Pauline,
Corset and album and Pauline,
Condemn not weak Tattiana mine;
A new Kaverine Eugene mine,
But, as I said, Zaretski mine
Dreaming herself the heroine
A tombstone, Aphrodite's shrine,
Before the dregs they shall divine
Another bard with art divine
About the crop of hay, the wine,
Give me just half a glass of wine--
All to the grand saloon are gone--
Can she have been a moment gone
Frosty the night; the heavens shone;
Can hearty welcome give alone.
Good-night." Behold! she is alone!
Dies suddenly: of heirs alone
And in the frosty night alone
Forgotten in the village lone,
But that the eyes of every one
But send your grandson before long."No answer all that day was borne.
A constant harping on one tune,
Dreaming perchance in weal or woe
E'en hopeless egoism's dark shape.
"Ah! long the world hath missed thy shape!
Could in romantic mantle drape
Had bid her sigh for without hope--
For a fictitious misanthrope,
A dangerous, gloomy misanthrope,
Albums magnificent which scare
Gazed on him, called him. Useless care!
And impiously should declare,
Doth his brow wretchedness declare
And the more surely we ensnare
Breakfast the busy cooks prepare,
Enjoyeth peaceful slumber here_.
"Abandon hope for ever here!"
And Eugene soon discovered there
Alone the princess sitteth there,
By liberties or loose or light.And yet the city's flower was there,
And lo! he is already there!
Faces which we meet everywhere
And be not in advance severe.
And dark and drear the evenings were,
As if impossible it were
And spouted it with lyric fire--
Authors replete with sacred fire
For our Automedons are fire
Foeman or friend, I do aspire
And that no longer could inspire.
A hidden train of wild desire.
All that perfection could desire;
All that a poet could desire,
But Lenski, having no desire
Adieu! whate'er thou didst desire
At a great feast against desire,
And our swift troikas never tire;
And brooding o'er the ills he bore,
And the young girl appeared before
And shut him in a lonely nook.He read as vainly as before,
And thy protection I implore.
A gust of passion never tore
Away her golden earrings tore;
Endowing us from out her store
As bees who leave their dainty store
Bouyanoff too, my cousin, wore
"But which, my dear?--In days of yore
As thou, great Homer, didst of yore,
A fragile bridge and insecure,
For who imposture can endure,
Hath gradually learnt to endure;
But competition I abjure
But deeming all this nonsense pure,
Found out the secret how at pleasure
For long--for ever. To be sure
And then she soon 'twixt work and leisure
Happy who timely grew mature,
And after Albion's proud lyre
For ever with thy tattling lyre,
Felled a calumniator base!
For my wild garden and bookcase,--
A very troublesome disease,
Glides with a more luxurious ease;
But Tania's heart is not at ease,
Handbook of fashionable phrase
Address to you one single phrase
Eugene would speak regarding these.
From careless stanzas such as these,
And in her languid bosom raise
As cyphers others to appraise,
Away! and cease to ring their praise
And where the billows hoarsely raise
Because he could not gourmandise
Crushing and a confusing noise;
But at her shriek ran forth with noise
Engrave the ice with strident noise.
Could in a humble sphere despise,
A blood-bespattered shade would rise,
But now a question in this wise
And I admired their common sense
A curious interest disclose
"Command me, darling, what you choose"--
But nowhere can she find repose,
Do agitate his late repose.
Deprive our schoolgirls of repose,
And where at last his bones repose
But better loved the soft repose
And the conviction soon arose,
Furious he from the table rose;
As many dinners I rehearse,
Barking, songs, whistling, laughter coarse,
And also that my feeble verse--
Although we read him heaps of verse.
Detecting him the passing horse
A fiery, yet well-broken horse,
Departed, ordered out his horse
At womankind he growled a curse,
Existence would not make a curse,
Am I to go through the whole list?""How dull you are this morning, nurse!"
All visited him at first, of course;
A dinner, whimsical each course,
Admirer of the peaceful Muse,
A mournful temper on his Muse.
By other thoughts be occupied.But I the products of my Muse,
But I must now employ my Muse
But look you--ah! do not refuse."
Besides the hobbies of a spouse
Deplores a most unworthy spouse
But Olga would not such peruse.
But what results? His eyes peruse
Even as Moscow, city proud.Confess, O ye who this peruse,
But this amusement delicate
All this I know is out of date,
Afar is borne by cruel fate,
Condemned to exile dire by fate,
Both were expectant of the hate
By the coarse wit of worldly hate;
Both were of passion satiate
Excruciate the heart and late
But if the truth I must relate,
"But tell me, nurse, can you relate
Desirous to annihilate
But round the hostess scintillate
But now my mind is desolate,
A mild quotation to translate,
A promenade in twilight late
And you, O maids immaculate,
But I came not to adulate:
And jests doth recapitulate.
Conscious of death approximate,
And, joy of souls effeminate,
By many a lamp illuminate,
And stupid censors passionate;
But if my lot unfortunate
And grasp a stirrup fortunate--
For evermore is separate.
But merely to exasperate;
By an _obrok's_ indulgent rate:
By rank as settled by the State.
Eternally to imitate
God knows! The very trace is lost.'Tis sweet the foe to aggravate
Around my stanzas incomplete
Encountered punishment complete,
Grew like a lily pure and white,
A bottle of a vintage white
Beneath the table-cloth of white,
All so distinct, and all so white!
Happy who thereto can unite
A philosophic anchorite:
But I must add to what I write
And madrigals I'm asked to write!
And irritates the appetite.
At last is shrunk and withered quite?
By Olga stood, dejected quite
A Russian household simple quite,
Affection how did you requite?
For I myself was thirteen quite;
Fond declarations they invite
A dagger, asterisk, or note
And an elegiac poem wrote.
But Lenski madrigals ne'er wrote
And the attendants called in haste.
All which in Paris eager taste,
And she despite herself would waste
And ease and fashionable waste,--
And education runs to waste,
And exclamations interlaced."Princesse, mon ange!"--"Pachette!"--
And the cast-iron statuette
From whose analysis minute
A wild enthusiastic tongue,
From her my lips shall learn the tongue
Did they not all the Russian tongue
"Alas! my friend, no revenue!"
Ah! it may be, affection true
For ever your Tattiana leave.
And all without her husband's leave.
But now our hero we must leave
Antiquity no pleasure gave,
But promise of our meeting gave,
And, by the light the moonbeams gave,
A first success light pinions gave,
At his pale brow a shot to have,
As thoughts which gentle maidens have,
Charming with grave simplicity.He sang of love--to love a slave.
A prudent man like you and brave
And blest me, sinking to the grave.
For him an honourable grave,
But where Melpomene doth rave
And thy inebriating wave
And her bespangled robe doth wave
But my Oneguine the whole eve
Beside his Olga doth he grieve,
A timid, shrinking love to grieve.
And that too often we receive
But I await thee: scarce alive
Depart in peace and friendly live?
And our successors soon shall drive
And yet he in your cause would strive
Applause, the people's donative.
By the decree of Mighty Jove,
Along the hall, and high above
And enmity and hope and love--
Farewell! thou golden days of love!
And what resulted? Drunk with love,
Extended--haunt which Dryads love.
By absence who hath chilled his love,
A thick immense neglected grove
Around the meadow and the grove.
And in the Summer Garden rove.
Gently for pranks he would reprove
At morn, hand clasped in hand, they rove
Desire to rule ye may observe
And supper. In the country we
And reads with rapid eager eye
And Lenski, closing his left eye,
But ye, O happy husbands, ye
Extinguished ashes do not blaze--
"But," cried Zaretski in amaze,
Do ye of spring the blossoms graze?
A hand of ice appeared to seize
Confront thy fated torturer!Love's pangs Tattiana agonize.
Gifts such as these alone could prize,
A bristly bear of monstrous size!
Aside she casts her veil of gauze
And who is not a tiresome thief?
And honestly 'tis my belief
By Heaven in lieu of happiness.Habit alleviates the grief
                    Dmitrieff
    Griboyedoff
Gvozdine, Bouyanoff, Petoushkoff
But stop! I will present thee, if
Even beneath her parents' roof
Came with Monsieur Triquet, a prig,
Forth from the crowd of nymphs surrounding
Espy him approaching,
Farthingales, patches, were the thing,
Basins and jugs--well! everything
Also one Viazemski, remarking
And an old gent the poet marking
As butterflies to blossoms cling.
But why are your cheeks whitening?"
And chattering loud sit down to dine.Ceased for a space all chattering.
Amidst successes flattering
Free, in the blossom of his spring,
Behold! orthography despising,
Eloquent raver all-surpassing,--
At last my father gave his blessing,
Attentive to the heart's first beating,
Follow up love--a secret meeting
And Kniajnine, apt at copying.
Existence calmly sped along,
A riding whip. She strolls along.
Glittered in a perspective long,
And grant success to labour long;
And thus he never fell among
And wild festivities among
And oft at eventide a throng
And led me off to church with song."
Either with him or thee in song,
A double force unto their song
Black curls which to his shoulders hung.
Enough! my pack is now unslung--
Bard of the Finnish maiden young.
Bevies of treacherous maidens young;
And thoughtlessness to woe might lead."Thus did our friend Oneguine preach:
For Moscow fops and Circes each
Britzka, kibitka, or in coach.
Alas! with merited reproach.
But ultimately doth approach.
Did not their lips with foreign speech
Attentive listened to his speech,
Drunk as a fly; and thus the French
But home his body to despatch
Ever absorbed a maid so much:
And many a caravan on high
Careless of fame his spirit high
And from the misty woodland nigh
And golden Autumn draweth nigh,
But scarce had turned the corner nigh,
Good governs all! The hour draws nigh
A sportsman who in covert lies.But finally she heaves a sigh,
And, heaving a regretful sigh,
And the eternal lorgnette through
Full many a glance like lightning flash,
And pressed her hand--the crimson blush
Above the humble urn of death.
_Affectionately yours till death_.
Grew brighter still. But Lenski hath
But lo! his braggart neighbour hath
But to Vladimir Eugene saith:
Beneath his head the pillow smooth,
But memory like a serpent's tooth
And thou shalt taste the joys of earth.
"Drive on!" the cheerful cry goes forth,
Behold! green tables are brought forth,
Full many a foolish prank brought forth;
By the fine silver of the north.
For him were but of little worth,
Found the ideal of my youth,
But, knowing not the actual truth,
            Baratynski
But stay! A dolt am I who speak!
A Russian in Childe Harold's cloak,
All hail! my good old friend Bordeaux!The fire sinks low. An ashy cloak
And the sagacious Triquet back
And he had made her heart beat quick!
And thus secures the prey we seek.
Autocrat of the drawing-room seek?
At times, if only once a week,
And then a cup of coffee drank,
A door he opens. But why shrank
An oval countenance and pink,
Alone he doth his claret drink,
But somehow there shone in his look
Calling to mind your icy look
And flowed harmoniously. He took
And clad in airy costume took
An honourable course ye took,
Caught him and by the collar took
But trembling on the mirror dark
A simple tombstone hath been set.There, when the rains of spring we mark
Assemblies oligarchical
And female tears hysterical,
Already he grew phthisical.
Harmless, but quite nonsensical.
Economy political,
A fop, in dress pedantical.
And cannot anything conceal,
For promises her feet reveal
And with gray hair ambrosial
And others rise ephemeral!
Behind her a grave general.
A ball in Peter's capital,
Combs of all sizes, files of steel,
Across the gloom of heaven would sail
God grant I meet not at a ball
Another tribune of the ball
Forgot the world, the noisy ball,
Enamoured at her feet to fall.
And finally he deigns let fall
A whisper runs along the hall,
Assigned a lodging, from the hall
Crush and confusion in the hall,
Exclaiming, "We must change 'em all!
For long he had endured them all.
Bedding is laid out and to all
A white and undulating pall
Came forth in all her magic sheen.The snow descends and buries all,
For consecrate to me he fell
For your instruction here to tell
And crossed with trembling hand the maid."I am in love," her whispers tell
But lo! the friends to chat commence."How are our neighbours fair, pray tell,
At thirty who was married well,
A worthy object 'tis, and well
Ennui can in the country dwell
And think: here lies who loved me well,
And wished to say to him farewell.
And rest from bygone days of strife.But pause! Thou calm retreats, farewell,
Are all your relatives quite well?
And gallicisms I love as well
And sometimes into snares as well
At twenty who was prig or swell,
"Boredom, my friend, behold the ill--"
And wisely gallops to the hill.
By the old lime-tree or the rill,
A garden by a shining rill.
An hour passed by--another--till,
Domestic life attracts me still,
As in their turn the seasons roll.
At eighteen not to play the fool!
A nursling yet for Hope to school.
Conventionality's dull tool--
A shape half cat and half a crane.Yet ghastlier, yet more wonderful,
And Eugene ever in her soul
And now philanthropy his soul,
But my Tattiana, on my soul,
A schoolmaster in yellow shawl
A love epistle he doth scrawl.
Enchanted by the moon's pale beam.
Deep in our mother Earth's chill breast!"Tattiana's eyes with tender gleam
And a boy handed round the cream.
But Tania just as in a dream
Guards fondly hope's uncertain dream.
Eugene at first began to dream,
But sweeter in a midnight dream
E'en from her cradle's earliest dream,
All this may be an empty dream,
Awaiting on the shore I roam
A wish from place to place to roam,
Back to his regiment must roam.
And a malicious epigram
And love's delicious diadem
But, as he never opened them,
And true, his pistol's faultless aim
Cast upwards then her eyeballs dim
And the lime alley's twilight dim
But could not. Then she questioned him:--
Dared calmly cleanse his nails 'fore him,
From first to last page to the rim.
A country damsel's album trim,
Could not conceive how serious Grimm
And lonely through the forest creeps.""Is she in love?" quoth one. "With whom?
Had filled her youthful breast with gloom,
All slumber. In the drawing-room
"Had he been long here, and where from?
And leans upon the monster's arm,
Fantastic images shall swarm
A Russian poem's mechanism
Distinctly not its mechanism.
And I discerned through Fancy's prism
Dressing as quickly as he can,
A new acquaintance we must scan.
A trifle pale, a trifle lean,
Friends of Liudmila and Ruslan,
At last became a ruined man.
_Demetrius Larine, sinful man,
Eugene directs the trusty man
Four deadly paces do they span;
Deep into debt his father ran;
But when Tattiana's hand had ta'en
And satisfied with vengeance ta'en.
A friendly hand thy life hath ta'en!
Away, Tattiana, hath been ta'en.
But scarce had maids their saucers ta'en
Assuredly should not have been
Had a deluded victim been
A fond and careful mother been.
A substitute for lamps we hail!Obedient she had ever been
And fields my joys have ever been;
Become a faithful wife and e'en
"Come," she cried, "sister, tell me e'en
But plainer girls they oft had seen.
From gales a hill behind was seen;
Before him red roast beef is seen
Approach not to hearken
_E sempre bene_, gentlemen!
Amid submissive herds of men
And isolated from all men,
Another his betrothed was given;
By sympathy I have been driven.
An exile from their troublous reign,
Dreading the world's remarks malign,
And viewed the door with cunning eye.All bustle when he makes a sign:
At times talk nonsense with design;
But boldly I myself resign:
And she to whom my lyre would fain,
Dressed him, undressed, and dressed again?
But to the garden once again
A dwarf adorned with tail, again
A maid hath oft, may yet again
And agitate my heart again;
By an avowal just as plain.
Detest him for a brother slain?
Alas! the youthful lover slain,
By whom the youthful bard was slain?"--
Can lower depths beyond remain?
As deaf and silly doth remain,
But, that life longer may remain,
And gave himself but little pain
And thus it is 'twould cause me pain
And an habitual sense of pain;
And, though a plucky scatterbrain,
After the wedded couple strain;
Behold, my sobs I scarce restrain--"
A ring she heard the ancient strain:
A case of books he doth obtain--
Although her book did not contain
And distance interposed in vain,
And far removed from rumour vain;
Cease the pursuit of shadows vain,
And galloped home. But pistols twain,
Ere conversation could begin,
But by degrees the crowd begin
For God's sake, Lenski, don't begin!
At morn an icy bath within
A canine face with horns thereon,
And that unrivalled paragon,
And gossip of the town and fashion
Agreed! but then the whirl of fashion,
Behold! the world's opinion!
Cast down his eyes in trepidation
But Eugene, hating litigation
And tears of reconciliation:
Although it will not bear translation,
Enhances love in estimation
And hot with jealous indignation,
And sulked in silent indignation;
And eye which gleams with inspiration--
And thou, youth's early inspiration,
A charm with it in conversation.
Alone within his habitation
A Vampire fond of meditation,
An innate love of meditation,
And buried deep in meditation,
As formerly much agitation.
And long internal agitation
And marking Tania's agitation,
A love which knew no limitation,
Amid a serious disputation,
By what idea or observation
And a determined disposition,
For journalistic deglutition
Beneath the silver of the moon
Behind the mountain sank the moon.
And bends her mirror on the moon,
And now 'tis night, the guardian moon
A lancer her soul dotes upon:
And the cold beauties of the season:
Cousin, rememb'rest Grandison?"
A jolly song and distant horn;
And modest, cheerful as the morn,
And sallied forth one brilliant morn--
Bright day will then begin to burn,
Do we alone our losses mourn
Delighted glances in return;
Have entered never to return.
A load of care upon the maid."But lo! forth from the valleys dun
As when the tempest's veil is drawn
And on the footstool sitting down
And the fair sex as light as down!
But, to his uncle's mansion flown,
For summer to the country flown,
Glimmers and dies. This is well known,
Besides, a duellist well-known
For o'er a word to fashion known,
And bitter torment never known.
Have latterly vexatious grown;
Hath suffered but indifferent grown,
And town and friends forgotten quite.This northern summer of our own,
Far from his Italy--his own.
And the young damsel from the town,
But tell me what am I to do?
Familiar to him long ago.
Draw near. I soon to sleep shall go--
Alas! abroad I cannot go.
"Good-bye, Oneguine, I must go."--
But say he was a genius who
But they draw near. Before them, lo!
"And is it she? It must be--no--
And usually despised it too),
But would not look at Cicero.
Have guessed already. Yes, quite so!
For was it not her duty to
But dinner-time comes. Two and two
A grammar, likewise Petriads two,
Although unknown to fame mayhap,
Buried in meditation deep,
But stares into the darkness deep.
Are oft deceptive--like their feet.Where is Oneguine? Half asleep,
As drunken tramps at nightfall sleep,
Arouses rustics from their sleep.
Far from the rest the pair would creep
Both bush and brake, ravine and steep,
Across the stage still madly sweep,
Girls in anticipation skip!
Forgive me! Such the love I bear
All are constrained and fetters bear,
From boxes or from stalls in rows.To the assembly her they bear.
From everything the heart held dear
_Come to my golden palace, dear_!
Even as the love of children dear.
And since I pulled thee by the ear--
As in some frenzied dream of fear
Entreaties, oaths, fictitious fear,
And Heavens! warbled forth we hear:
A smile from slumbering nature clear
And dost thou know her?"--"We live near."
A friar black approaching near,
Epistles of six sheets or near,
A lady draws the hostess near,
But still more stupid did appear
Do me a favour and appear.
Doth in her gentle eye appear.
Go, on the Neva's bank appear,
For which no springtime shall appear?
But as to fighting--'twill appear!
Doth in us or our names appear,
And happy unto you appear.
A vision desolate and drear
But word for word his letter read.All is foreseen. My secret drear
And breathe a drama in his ear.
Had let fall many a bitter tear:
For us, may be for many a year.
Did seem to greet the youthful year;
And from the Millionaya afar
And grown more curious by far
And to revive Tattiana seemed.The chairs are thrust back with a roar,
And that a bottle sealed with tar
And hat surnamed a "Bolivar"
As in the timid forest deer,
And exclamations and good cheer.
Gliding in negligent career,
Amid the company career.
"At Larina's."--"Hem, that is queer!
Girls the _kashourka_ much prefer.
And traces with a slender finger
Adroitly seized and carried her;
And like a shadow haunted her.
Doth love's incautiousness in her
Gravely repeating to another
Aye bids ye in some way or other--
But finally grew bored by her.
And courtier, fop, and usurer
Contend with knife and fork and platter,
Appear; along the road of Tver
And read our newspapers scarce ever,
At Russ she was by no means clever
'Fare thee well, and if for ever,
Conceitedly on Tania fair,
Books he abandoned like the fair,
Beside our youthful heroine fair,
Describe in detail the affair,
Hath mixed himself in the affair,
And you, my youthful damsels fair,
For Ay is like a mistress fair,
And Moscow many a beauty fair:
A kerchief round her silver hair
Cropped in the latest style his hair,
But with confused and bashful air,
Finally tost his arms in air
And the Skatenines, aged pair,
Approaches Olga and the pair
Around the carriage of the pair--
Before the altar, lo! the pair,
Accents of rapture or despair
Flies past the porter to the stair,
Behold, the crowd begins to stir,
And Flianoff, pensioned councillor,
But gray Phillippevna the door
Fat Poustiakoff drove to the door;
Anicia soon appears, the door
And beats with rapid foot the floor.
Enamoured, simple-minded, poor,
Comfort and succour to the poor,
And wheresoe'er thy footsteps err,
And sermon--but in that dread hour
And at the stages bugs and fleas
And devastate the woods around.There was no doubt! Eugene, alas!
And seek in buzzing swarms the meads.
Crunching the morning snow she treads;
Come rumbling up the neighbouring roads,
And all that from thy hand proceeds--
Already dance to song proceeds;
And rising from her bench proceeds;
And a grand festival proceeds.
And thus each stubbornly proceeds.
For riot, frolics, mighty feeds,
And mourned him still. Why mourn his fate?'Twas eve. 'Twas dusk. The river speeds
Are ye replaced by other maids
And gradually day unfolds.
Capers applauds with clap of hands,
Abuse their masters, rub their hands:
At times my reason almost bends,
A maiden's secrets--of the heart.Triumphs--their own or those of friends--
Against my inclination, friends,
Existence without wife or friends,
But little warmth the fireplace lends,
And care but little for its ends.
And her voice sweeter than the sounds
Appear attuned to softer chords;
And wild among them grew her words--
At least their accents and their words
"Adieu! thou home where peace abides,
And supercilious dames she glides,
A crab upon a spider rides,
Beneath acacias, cherry-trees,
A due which must to earth be paid.The courtyard full of serfs he sees,
An inn at every stage erect.But now, what wretched roads one sees,
And nothing more important sees;
Brambles she snaps and lilacs crushes,
Both for the nails and for the tushes.
And all thy precious elegies,
Around the garden homeward hies.
And overcome antipathies
But lonely beneath Finnish skies
From hall to yard and garden flies,
Ever to hear the same replies
All breathless and without replies.
And to the Bourse the cabman plies;
Amy Petrovna  utters lies,
Had come both friends and enemies--
And the bad book accompanies.
Alarmed by jealous agonies:
Daily beefsteaks and Strasbourg pies
Flanked by immortal Strasbourg pies,
Even the rosy wafer dries
And pelt him with cherries,
And alphabetically tries
From public and from private ties,
At neighbouring hospitalities.
And fashion's gay frivolities;
And in her grasp the letter shakes,
Also, to equalise the scales,
Enclosing pictures of fair dames.
But lights incendiary flames
And the dark fringe of men, like frames
And jolting jarred the window-frames.
And due precautions take betimes.
And the young revellers of past times
And he waits dinner. Lenski comes,
Exhausted by my woes and rhymes,
Beside the cup she sang her rhymes
Had to compose in secret rhymes,
Attentive be unto my rhymes
And an enchanting shoulder shines
Beneath the moon which dimly shines,
And fashionable magazines,
Arouse yourselves, fair ones.
And now he views forgotten foes,
Esteemed him much as the world goes.
And meditative homeward goes,
All vanished as an echo goes.
Between the stalls, along the toes;
And thus ancestral dust reveres.
And still the coachmen round the fires
As with innumerable fires.
Compassion now or wrath inspires
Forgive the fever youth inspires,
And where tempestuous love's desires,
And now his youthful heart desires
And of the irksome harness tires,
And slowly life coagulates--
But wretched who anticipates,
Cards, balls, routs, poetry or fetes;
A trouble fell upon the sprites;
And what like menaces fatigues,
By poor Tattiana in the blues;
For ever carps, condemns, pursues?
A victim decked with golden leaves;
All which caprice and affluence craves,
Across the Baltic's salt sea waves,
And pallid nature trembling grieves,
Descends, the order Guillot gives,
Beats that of friends and relatives:
And various chords upon it proves,
Before her straight with roguish eyes.
And truffles, dear to youthful eyes,
But wide Tattiana oped her eyes
At the same hour she oped her eyes
For Lenski, sought him with her eyes,
But finally he oped his eyes
For tallow, wood and other things
But still remembrance to him clings,
Disperse yourselves, darlings,
All that industrial London brings
All this in many cases brings
Happy and glorious_. But this brings
And now she skips and now she springs
Brilliant, ethereal, there springs
Along the Neva's bank he sleighs,
Do ye not hear my mournful sighs?
Goddess of lovers' tender sighs.
Hangs heavy on the oaken boughs,
Exceptionless as no rule is,
Calmly her eyes encounter his--
Eugene, more tolerant than this
And deem the world perfection is!
But yet Terpsichore bespeaks
Betimes, and sees, when morning breaks,
Go hear the rustling of the oaks
For the first time the hammer clicks.
And terrify a swarm of ducks,
As your light footprints on the green.Diana's bosom, Flora's cheeks,
A horse's hoofs she hears--She shrinks!
But now--my very blood congeals,
And beckon to the passing sails.
Custom the despot soon prevails.
Do we foresee in troubled dreams
And the heart's agitated dreams.
For rural solitude and dreams,
And where Thalia softly dreams
Descended swift in turbid streams
And where the admirable streams
Barely to draw her breath she seems,
And heedless of approval seems,
Awhile sound conversation seems
And more imagination teems.
Glory with which our history teems
A windmill too a jig performs
And wildly waves its arms and storms;
Device of rural minds acute!)Young maidens, fair maidens,
Disport yourselves, maidens,
Bokharians, peasants, beds of greens,
Friends and companions,
Barking, young ladies' osculations,
And dames of fine organisations,
Had finished life amid his sons,
For baseness of the spirit scorns,
All covered up with snow in heaps,
A dreadful sleep Tattiana sleeps.
A little virgin mirror peeps.
And dream of life's delightful dawn?The house is crammed. A thousand lamps
Feather-beds, also poultry-coops,
Behold! beside their dwelling groups
Feeling in others much esteemed.With smiling face he Lenski hears;
Although the destined coffin nears,
Faithless, alas! thy maid appears,
All in the good old style appears,
Distracted by her grief appears
And what from its recess appears?
And to these letters and these tears.
For visions of my childish years
For dolls, e'en from her earliest years,
But fools--their calumnies and sneers"--
And judgment which unsteady veers
Epicurean philosophers,
Boulevards, belfries, milliners,
Develops and matures its powers,
A moment effervescing stirs,
But suddenly a snowdrift stirs,
Balconies, lion's heads on doors,
And hated casual visitors,
And the kind-hearted servitors:
And where a madrigal occurs
And breathes upon the chilly glass,
Dreaming of what not, pretty lass,
And from his dressing-room would pass
Both day and night he now must pass
And lo! five paces more they pass,
Divinity without access
But the indifferent princess,
Entreaties, woes and prayers, confess
And now, I mournfully confess,
Also their feet--yet ne'ertheless
A child devoid of childishness
And contemplative dreaminess;
"But strange am I to happiness;
And freezing fits of weariness.
Amid the awful emptiness
Attractive in its banefulness?
Aroused in him some tenderness.
Await the long-delayed caress.
Conquer by passion and address,
But Eugene long hath left the press
A young Armida's lips to press,
All that the heart would fain express--
Dally with a dishevelled tress
And though I read it with distress,
Habit was given us in distress
A strong resemblance these possess--
Alas! It is not hard to guess.
Could not in that brief moment guess!
Have felt love's agitated kiss
Beneath his lips' devouring kiss.
A lady's hand doth never kiss.
Even amusing fools we miss
Can count the time without much fuss--
Beside the thundering abyss
Everywhere trumpeting its feats,
Again the giddy waltz repeats.
As every journal now entreats,
And stay whose length none recollects.
Along Saint Petersburg's paved streets,
Also thy rough-and-tumble fights,
And oh! what verses, what delights,
As daylight glimmers, darkness flits,
And his poor basten sandal knits.
As formerly the shepherd sits
But, after mutual compliments,
Again the plague of boyhood--love?The hours once more Oneguine counts,
But ten strikes and his sledge he mounts
A rivulet beneath them shoots
Ever receive with kindly hearts
Deliberate approach of guests
And like Napoleons each of us
A million bipeds reckons thus
Corneille's majestic genius,
A critic of the stage malicious,
A slave of actresses capricious,
By such allusions scandalous,
By Tolstoy's pencil marvellous,
And tiresome rogues ridiculous
And glittering simpletons beside;Amid sly, pusillanimous
Feeling is silly, dangerous.
Beyond the city-barriers haste.Thou also, reader generous,
Abandon cities riotous,
Come sing we in chorus
And hoofs and crooked snouts and paws,
And through the lofty windows views
And Comet champagne foaming flows.
Amber on pipes from Stamboul glows,
Before a fire which feebly glows
And this the faithful one allows,
And all the joys which Winter knows.
For otherwise--God only knows!
Enjoy the meed which Fame bestows--
And I confess that now-a-days
Alas! the friend of childish days
As the sins of my youthful days
As partner of my mournful days,
And then to meditate for days
Companion of my childhood's days.
Consisting of harmonious lays,
Delicious visions, jests and fights!Alas! my stomach it betrays
Grows pale and sinks, but nothing says;
But soon she altered all her ways,
Delighted much his former ways
And hates the world's discordant ways.
A joyous troop of little boys
Ere this but one brief moment beat
Age immature averse to cheat--
And boiling o'er with friendly heat,
And in a whisper did repeat:
A hundred times will not repeat,
Do not cold-bloodedly repeat
And at economy was great;
Alone amid possessions great,
And cry: he was a poet great!
Attend in male attire arrayed.On this artistical retreat
A ball here, there a children's treat,
Happy who quit life's banquet seat
Abandoned he his country seat,
Approach not to gaze at
Begins to talk of this and that,
But when two minutes she had sat,
And blush to own himself reflect.
And Christian folk will, I expect,
Faithfully shall I now depict,
Eugene fell prostrate at her feet--
A heavy goose on scarlet feet,
But now--what brings you to my feet?--
Bows and the scrape of many feet,
And rapid whirl of many feet,
And watch her eye's full glance to meet.
But staggers, slips, and falls. We greet
And thou, from whom Tattiana sweet;
Ceaselessly to the maiden sweet
As hope uncertain and as sweet,
But time flies and she doth forget
Ah! I still struggle to forget
Beside a nameless rivulet,
And by that shady rivulet
And homeward like an arrow tore.My friends, the poet ye regret!
Ere the bright messenger had set.
And we--an unattractive set--
For twice you came to them and yet
"Alas! dear nurse, my heart is cleft,
Forth the _kibitka_ gallops swift,
And by the world repeated oft,
Born of a babbler in a loft
But from the Muses' loftiest height
And hurried home his awful freight.
Cartel, or challenge to a fight,
Above the yawning grave would fight,--
Eight times the heroes of the fight
And also fashionable beaux.Our hero stops and doth alight,
All about Olga--to a light
But wilful, frivolous, and light.
E'en for an instant find delight,
"But death from him will be delight.
Abandoning insane delight,
A sense of social delight,
And with emotional delight
And bless mankind with full delight.
And solitude and calm delight,
And solitude and calm delight.
And like the prisoner's our delight
And full of innocent delight,
Ah! brethren, what was my delight
Blest be the labours of the light,
As a babe's slumber, or the light
And Schiller read by candlelight.
But, ere he mounts the marble flight,
An ever transcendental flight;
Aurora's ruddy rays of light--
From you too Eugene took to flight,
And swifter than the swallow's flight.
And showed with an uncertain light
Deep in the greenwood far away?Arising with the morning's light,
But lo! already the moon's light
And be as happy--as I might.
And breathe the balmy breath of night;
From her half-open vest of night.
And vanish like a bird in air.Full many a lovely star hath night
And glasses unemployed all night;
But turning morning into night,
And gloomy epigrams malicious.How oft, when on a summer night
"Delighted."--"When?"--"This very night.
And better, if I judge aright;
All this, my friends, translate aright:
And is it true her garland bright
As if he cruelly had joked!'Twas dusk! Upon the table bright
Behold! the moon was shining bright
Adorned with many a vision bright
Beneath the eyes of ladies bright
And in a vision, sinless, bright,
And form a network left and right;
And never was the ear affright
Before whose inexperienced sight
A bill of fare hangs full in sight
As yet none had discovered aught;
Deserted Eugene. He, distraught,
But by fantastic dreams distraught,
As on the rapid wings of thought
Because in singleness of thought
Full of exasperating thought.
A register of fleeting thought,
Eugene of course related nought,
And my dark soul to light was brought;
A table to the fire is brought,
But trusted the ideal she wrought?--
At first such contradictions wrought
Again her rural life she sought,
From storms protection having sought,
All Nature winter seemed to await,
And grasps a pen: his verse, albeit
And at the table sat her down.To tragedy, the fainting fit,
For maiden's hearing deemed unfit),
A pleasure though with sorrow knit:
A dove which on a lyre doth sit;
E'en as the poet says he leant.
A letter for her hero meant:
As we lure the young gallant,
Allure the young gallant
Alone beside it, gray and bent,
And o'er the granite coping bent,
Because she was so innocent,
Chief rascal, pot-house president,
Haughty appear, subservient,
Gvozdine, a landlord excellent,
Angel or fiend malevolent.
Bringing his partner corpulent
And pleasure's daily blandishment,
A timid love to banishment?--
Awakens secret merriment
Calm and without embarrassment,
But now--none heeds the monument
A while ago the winter spent,
A Kalmuck gray, in caftan rent
Being from hell or heaven sent,
But enough! Now, 'tis my intent
And with his lot in life content,
But was our friend Eugene content,
First reconciled and then content;
And scanned in silence its content.
And all the three to breakfast went;
An invalid from lung complaint.
But strength of mind and self-restraint
A forest now she sees in front
And I to give thee cakes was wont?"--
And in the final tome we learnt,
A heart wherein pure passion burnt;
And consolation soon begot.
Billiards abandoned, cue forgot,
"Behold my friend Monsieur Guillot;
Grateful to Heaven for their lot.
Alas! how wretched now my lot!"
Examine her from head to foot.
And meditative from the spot
By neighbouring families bewept,
A sidelong look doth Eugene dart:
Because her passion wanted art,
But the young unpolluted heart
And ease the tortures of the heart--
Fruit of the yearnings of the heart.
Confessions which a trusting heart
And the lone secret of her heart,
A lancer captivates her heart!
But followed the strict rules of art,
But Fortune cast our lots apart
A hidden meaning could impart,
And oft in whispers would impart
False confidence or doubt to impart,
By flattery and lover's art--
Anew the flames of passion start
Eugene designed with me to start
As vernal storms the fields athwart.
And, by the way, I here assert
As oft to meat and drink advert,
An infant maiden doth exhort
And no ridiculous report,
A box of terrible import.
At times to silence would resort,
Doctors and women, sobs and groans.But, howsoe'er his lot were cast,
As if it were some funeral feast.
Ah! I'm so weak--my throbbing breast!
Had not yet withered his young breast.
Bard of the "Feasts," and mournful breast,
For every loyal Russian breast!
Despite the anguish of his breast,
By bee and butterfly which pass.'Twas she who first within his breast
And about dawn upon his breast
Appeared, Don's effervescing boast,
Between the blanc-mange and the roast;
A flimsy trace of musings past
From shades of the relentless past.
All rattled in the ball-room vast,
And youthful madness, youthful fires.The gulf between them was so vast,
But this is my advice, 'twere best
And is it true and not a jest,
Hath the bard, by indifference blest,
A life in common with the rest;
Doth on the billiard table rest,
And grant his weary bones their rest
A beauty languidly at rest,
And thus unto her nurse did say:"Nurse, 'tis so close I cannot rest.
By fond illusions once possest
And then made merry pope and guest,
But first permission did request
Devoured them with an eager zest.
From apprehension of the cost,
By their own horses, not the post--
And would by candlelight arise.Romances pleased her from the first,
For treachery had done its worst;
Friendship and friends he likewise curst,
For, from the outset, 'twas unjust
Among some ancient ballads thrust,
And read De Pradt or Walter Scott!
All the young people round about,
But you must both be quite tired out!
Can we not stealthily make out
At forty suffered from the gout,
A little Juvenal to spout,
Eaten, drunk, gossiped and grown stout:
For folly's dues thou hadst to pay.Noise, laughter, bowing, hurrying mixt,
A pillar by, two aunts betwixt,
But praised be God! in health art thou!
Demands that I translate for you
But with austerity!--for you
"But, _matushka_, to Moscow you
And now upon the snow in thaw
For whom, Tattiana, is it meant?I have known beauties cold and raw
A young man motionless he saw,
And marvels deemed he thus should view.
Because he yawned at the bare view
Had reconciled the pair anew!
But upon all that Eugene knew
As in a garden when I grew,
And soon imagination threw
Aside the foes their mantles threw,
A feeble version read below,
Gazing upon a note below.
All the creations which below
From happy inspiration flow,
Behold her downcast eyes which glow,
And herds of oxen wandering low;
And in the morning doth not know
And where may be her sister now?
Grown clammy, stick fast in the snow;
Cast a gay lustre on the snow,
And roofs near morn blanched o'er with snow;
But such is not my project now,
Cocked hat and melancholy brow.
And all your love on self bestow;
And linen on him doth bestow.
Flew to collect his rural tax;
And so--God bless them, if He list.In this the love of the fair sex
Discourse of Bentham or of Say,
And past the threshold of decay,
Chained to his bedside night and day
Beside the stormy sea one day
And what the old man might bequeath.And in reality one day
From Romulus unto our day.
And wholly occupied his day--
Had much to do at home that day,
As men who much had done that day.
Down in the courtyard magpies gay,
And for a time our course delay,
Arrange without the least delay--
A game of chess would often play,
Cunning already to display
For the young poet they display.
Fair object of my guileless lay,
Enough, enough, conclude thy lay--
But the dark sepulchre I may
And though perchance a lady may
Another visit hastes to pay.
Curtly announcing for the fray
And blest the shadows of the night."To-morrow's dawn will glimmer gray,
Driving abreast three horses gray.
Friends, I must your indulgence pray.
Avowal then 'twas time to pray,
Behind, of glasses an array,
But I abandoned their array,
A cup of tea upon a tray.
And well-instructed to betray!
All with urbanity betray,
And starting suddenly doth say:
Almost became a poet say--
Alone beneath your rooftree stay
But it grew late; he must not stay;
A passing snowstorm wreathed away
Carried a truth divine away;
And gallops to her house away.
As it were, tore himself away.
Ah! what hath fate not torn away!
From the dread pistol turn away.
And to Oneguine far away
But thoughts meander far away--
But borne in spirit far away
Across the smiling face of dawn.Alas! Tattiana fades away,
But Summer swiftly fades away
And calmly sleeps the hours away,
Ah! he has gone the other way"--
A hemisphere beneath her sway,
But I, in love, was mute and dull.The Muse appeared, when love passed by
But I was sharp in times gone by.
At table she was sitting by
A boat with splashing oar floats by,
And like a palisade flit by.
Alas! my friends, the years flit by
At first, I clung to secrecy:
And  they
A stable, kitchen, fence appeared.To consanguineous dinners they
A lover's letter might convey,
Eventually petrify
At least by show of sympathy;
Eugene was touched with sympathy;
Already Autumn chilled the sky,
But Eugene, incontestably,
At morn I must assuredly
And now we hear delightedly
A true account and in detail.But not at present, though sincerely
Entrusted all to her sincerely,
And turned to leave immediately,
Delicious nature, thee I fly,
Dark clouds before the north wind fly;
And ruthless fashion hath blackballed.I like this word exceedingly
And the world met her smilingly,
Harvests of souls unceasingly
Enchanting, but unwittingly,
And like Childe Harold gloomily
And the far mountains daintily
All arise. To the door he goes.Terror assails her. Hastily
God save his soul eternally
But of this love, e'en casually,
By waters shining tranquilly,
Danced the mazurka gracefully,
Descried before me suddenly!
From habit or maliciously,
Grasped a long knife and instantly
Conduct Tattiana constantly,
Employ your glasses constantly,
Around her neck, now violently
And of the attic. Honestly,
But who in that choice company
Aunts, mothers and their scrutiny,
Hath whiled the road's monotony,
A labour, torment, yet a joy,
Fearing his pupil to annoy,
And following them ye might espy
Attentive listened to the lad.But more the passions occupy
Drive on! the city barriers hoary
Dark shadows thicken--a dread cry
And wakened him with the loud cry:
Grow harsh and cruel, dead and dry,
But my Tattiana's eyes were dry.
Beneath a cross and shrubbery.
By night prepared for sorcery,
But scarce had sleep's soft witchery
And turned aside the drapery;
Alike by sighs and flattery.
Adieu, thou witness of our glory,
But, her own room in memory,
Haste, haste thy lagging pace, my story!
Free, I renewed the idolatry
Fragments of northern poetry,
And platitudes and pedantry,
Byron's capricious phantasy
Carried away by ecstasy,
And fits of coughing racked her chest.By the sick lady's gaiety
Before such fond simplicity
And mental elasticity.
Cursing his own stupidity,
Discovered much absurdity,
By dull insensibility,
And then with blind credulity
And husbands' tedious amity?
But grant with magnanimity
And naked uniformity.
By his embarrassed dignity--
Have echoed to eternity.
As giddy youth's hilarity--
Charming is your sincerity,
As Winter in their purity,
Dreams with no continuity,
Have my Oneguine--suddenly.
In that morass where you and I
"Not in the least, assured am I!"--
"My darling, growing old am I!
In former years thus did not I
Yet let us part in friendship, O
Nor Byron, Walter Scott, nor Seneca,
Upon the highway of the sea
Ye billows of blue Hadria's sea,
Time to denote by dinner, tea,
Perchance where Dunia pours out tea
Its name, my friends, was Martin Zadeka,
Tattiana
"Say, of the two which was Tattiana?"
Next Saturday. The Larina
Verses and tears et cetera.
To Tania Lenski; Kharlikova,
Opened the portals of the tomb
My poor Vladimir! In the tomb,
Or for the solitary tomb
Is the world to him sealed and dumb?
The inmate is for ever dumb,
Thinking: 'tis foolish to disturb
What! really going? 'Tis too bad!
Some are afar and some are dead.
To seek him out with bended head.
Shaking with serious air the head,
Now of a family the head,
Whene'er he had an aching head;
Or a swift hare from mead to mead
The first-fruits of my tale I read,
With shame I shudder and with dread--
Upon her brow sits wrath alone--And it may be a secret dread
Unto a ruthless tyrant dread.
I slumber much, a little read,
Some nice instructive novel read,
'Tis finished. Horrible to read!
No other book had time to read.
Nor slander viciously could spread
The pile of books, with carpet spread
Thereon the passing traveller read:
I Apuleius gladly read
Tattiana loved as when a lad,
Inhabited the country, clad
In dressing-gown, a cuckold glad:
Would lose his slippers or gazette.Time flies! a genial air abroad,
He dragged her by a forest road
His arm he offers. Mute and sad,
In love-lorn meditation sad.
I was incensed and he was sad.
Still certain authors, I may add,
With book in hand reclined in bed,
Undressed herself and went to bed
With hopeless passion: from her bed
'Tis time for supper, now for bed,
She could not sleep in her new bed.
So she her silken sash unlaced,
Upon the tumbled sofa placed,
The friends are called and quickly placed.Right opposite Tattiana placed,
The ancient _barshtchina_ replaced
Most carefully Zaretski placed
He drops his pistol silently.He on his bosom gently placed
In coach or post-cart duly placed
The two old ladies then embraced
Lay all the girls by sleep embraced,
In what he merely acquiesced.
To all good neighbours' sport conduced.
Most by this circumstance offended
The workpeople she superintended,
The bath on Saturdays attended,
Vice had due punishment awarded,
When to enlarge we shall succeed,
It may be that I did proceed--
Not all will like myself proceed--
Thither in future to proceed
'Tis done. To supper they proceed.
Will not five centuries exceed
He was a dangerous fool indeed.
Mortally sick I am indeed.
His uncle, busy man indeed,
Remarkable. She then indeed
Hissed forth. With serious air indeed,
Of fleeting glory take no heed.
He took no more the slightest heed;
Up to the attic, and all need
She seeks the garden in her need--
Whither and wherefore do I speed
Whene'er across the plain at speed
Nay, near--but destiny decreed--
On the dull stage find all things changed,
The wedding-day had been arranged,
Nor from the mob polite estranged,
What visions then her fancy thronged--
What bitter tears with thee I shed!
I mourn, but tears I cannot shed--
Just at that time his father died,
My mother-in-law who lately died
Vice in romance is glorified
Virtue was with a bride rewarded.But now our minds are mystified
Were you in love when you were young?"--"Alack! Tattiana," she replied,
Lenski unto the dame replied,
The new moon's crescent slim she spied,
Tattiana's trouble might have spied,
Longtime her mind is occupied.
The princess from the sofa cried
"I shall expire," Tattiana cried,
The matter by his conscience tried,
To sketch myself that I have tried
I should alarm our friendship tried:
Successfully to please her tried,
Her bow was easy, unreserved.Ah no! no faintness her attacked
The balls impelled, the blunt cue chalked;
He round the billiard-table stalked,
Whither two neighbouring dames have walked
Shamefaced, Tattiana downward looked
This life in masquerade concealed,
I cannot longer wage concealed.
Tell me, of sentiments concealed
More swift the room Tattiana fled,
Nor marked how summer's prime had fled
Sweet slumber winged its way and fled.
Soon, of the tempest which hath fled
Of the Tattiana of times fled.
Repose her silken curtains fled,
The troop of apparitions fled,
Nay! even as this instant fled,
The pains of night have wholly fled,
Of London life is "vulgar" called
Is it that I am now compelled
Zaretski shouted: "Why, he's killed!"--
The channel of the river stilled
Our tender dreamer had enrolled
Which might for many ages last.Surely ye all have overhauled
With blood instead of ink she scrawled,
Which all her darling friends have scrawled
Transparent o'er the Neva beamed
The peace which on his forehead beamed,
Her the ideal which he dreamed,
The purest of the dreams we dreamed,
She never of deception dreamed
His elegies, which plenteous streamed,
The blood gushed from the wound and steamed
Pursues phantasmagoria vain.Why is Tattiana guiltier deemed?--
Oneguine was--so many deemed,
That our desires which noblest seemed,
When hope's delightful flower but bloomed
He thought so, and existence charmed.
How soon to habits she conformed
Our paradise is no more sweet.Ah! how Tattiana was transformed,
To say farewell, and fussed and fumed
Only her countenance assumed
The manly toga scarce assumed,
Tattiana in despair unfeigned
Where many another hand had signed
Her money counted, and designed
Tall, slender, like thy form designed,
Made revelations undesigned,
Though, God be praised! he ne'er designed
That, for the century designed,
Or even, silent and resigned,
Spring cheered him up, and he resigned
To arid selfishness resigned,
When harsh demeanour hath consigned
Which Autumn late to earth consigned,
His lyre, to silence now consigned,
What do I ask? What cause assigned
Tattiana o'er the stream complained;
Whose hearts responsive have remained
Inseparable they remained.
So irremissible appear?O ye whom tender love hath pained
She consolation thence obtained--
My sum of happiness contained;
He sang of life's fresh colours stained
With us is easily attained.
The fruits of learning and combined
With intellect, a taste refined,
His chambers close wherein confined
Love to idealize inclined;
I'm not for witchcraft now inclined.
The venerable dame opined
Now a long branch itself entwined
If the fond hope I could have fanned
There, aping Gulnare's bard, he spanned
Though Baratynski verses penned,
The maiden's weary eye which yearned,
Tattiana more than ever burned
His neighbour's lowly tomb and mourned
Tattiana thanks to all returned,
To his Penates now returned,
He on the conflagration frowned.
Our heroes at full gallop sped,
The matchmaker a fortnight sped,
Into the cups already sped
Of lackeys in her pathway grouped,
Of his approach; but nothing cared
Her features no grimaces bleared;
My word of honour given have I.The tea, as I remarked, appeared,
To an assembly--she appeared
O yes! my hopes soon disappeared."
My image hath not disappeared,
With Olga; nor of this appeared
In dressing-gown at meals appeared.
Meals, secrets, occupations shared?
I mused: perhaps the matter's squared--
Quarrels among young friends he bred
Upon the Don's broad pastures bred
Homer, Theocritus, he jeered,
In her affairs ne'er interfered,
Seemed in a haze of green embowered.
The valleys dried and gaily flowered;
Their glory with their heels of red
His soul by crash of music fired,
To kiss the feet which I admired!
Singing God knows what maid admired,
In amorous flights when so inspired,
How like the billow I desired
His tea with rum no more desired,
'Tis in your power now, if desired,
The fated nutriment desired;
Strummed by a timid schoolgirl o'er.I write to you! Is more required?
I long by ballets have been bored,
Since Fame and Freedom he adored,
Though beauty he no more adored,
His ruffian bravery adored,
Neighbour by neighbour sat and snored,
I long enough deceived have erred.
Of the romances she preferred,
The Medal Otchakoff conferred!
Tattiana every day conferred
Where the first time she met with _him_.Thus widely meditation erred,
Tattiana through the forest erred,
Of Olga he in song averred;
In the recesses what hath stirred
Whilst from her countenance ne'er stirred
Oneguine's speeches I abhorred
Sit many monstrous shapes abhorred.
He who economy abhorred,
What hath he dreamed? What hath occurred?
Of censure for the same incurred;
The poet from Tamboff secured,
Till proper rings could be procured.
On melted wax in water poured;
Odes Lenski also had outpoured,
In fact, some people were assured
Rebuffed--as quickly reassured,
Trembles at artificial shame.The shining pistols are uncased,
Till the fire in her cheek decreased;
More timid than a doe long chased,
The contact of the foot I raised
You, he a noble mind disclosed,
On chairs in the saloon reposed,
To her an elegy composed.
Though some men, evilly disposed,
Was famous for thick-headedness.Lenski that eve in thought immersed,
In love adventures she was versed,
The blessings of humanity.Or, it may be, the bard had passed
When Friendship smiled or Love caressed.
"What ails thee?"--"Nothing."--He is fled.At home arriving he addressed
Replaced them in their box, undressed
The style in which my hero dressed;
When all around the entrance pressed,
"What ails thee, dear?"--"I feel depressed.
The image of her seal impressed.
Oneguine was the most impressed,
The strange apartment her oppressed:
Know that your sarcasm ill-suppressed,
Is it not truth? in tones suppressed
How much is in that word expressed!
So she in French herself expressed.
Not agony, but death expressed.
Wherein the heart its vows expressed,
Then weeping she sank back distressed
Nor enough strength of mind possessed
The maid whose note he still possessed
If the poor maiden could have guessed
Within that secret court discussed,
That rascal Lovelace she abused;
No signs of trouble her accused,
The hussar Pykhtin was accused.
Nought in the universe refused:
Hewn, hacked, and otherwise ill-used.
Some Russian authors he perused--
Not that she had his works perused,
The room my former master used.
Was with himself dissatisfied.In fact, the subject analysed,
Was he in health and void of care?--Even so! His passions soon abated,
The frolics of maidens.They sang, whilst negligently seated,
He ought to have conciliated
Her inmost soul had penetrated,
Nor long his mind was agitated
Were to analysis subjected.
They long at home have her expected--
His visit she had not awaited,
Tattiana with impatience waited
Vladimir Lenski visited
How the young imp on Tania doted!
To captivate her how devoted!
Of what he thought and what believed,
Lenski as a good match received,--
In vain was youth by us received,
Upon those margins she perceived
Retained the image, though short-lived,
The neighbourhood fresh sport derived.
They talked and laughed. The guests arrived.
The fatal tubes Lepage contrived
Which afterwards the muse revived.
The conversation was revived
Who had for four long years survived
Turned and replied as it behoved,
Which glowed with virginal desire.When but a boy he Olga loved
Perceived that he was still beloved,
He witnessed tenderly and moved
Oneguine, by first impulse moved,
Strictly the Carnival observed,
His energy and impotence.And numerous pages had preserved
The gifted songster never swerved,
The breath of Spring again renewed,
Simple and kindly and unwed,
Without the least constraint he bowed.
Who to the youthful hostess bowed,
In company, or simply bowed,
He gazed upon the clock which showed
Till amid trees a hovel showed,
Oneguine ne'er as poet showed
I know there's none more amiable.But from the interview what flowed?
The insensate fire of love still glowed
He wrote and spoke, so all allowed,
In correspondence been allowed.
Passion's wild sway I then allowed,
Journeys and warriors to wed.
Please her by their decorum fixed,
Titles and ages intermixed.
He with his little maiden played,
The deuce with my inside has played."
The drama of my youth was played.
Meadows and cornfields are displayed,
Without amaze or wrath displayed:
In Olga's face no life's displayed.
With bitter tears my mother prayed,
That we her constantly betrayed
Thus carelessly I once portrayed
There long time sad at heart he stayed:
Yet was her inmost soul o'erjoyed
Upon a soul inert and cloyed?--
Their noisy laugh her soul annoyed,
Of course Tattiana was annoyed
"What is your name?" The boor looked dazed,
She on the apparition gazed,
Which Ovid once immortalized,
Whom hath thy strain immortalized?
With tenderness hath recognized
In much his conduct stigmatized;
He found him on the table laid,
The powder in the pan is laid,
Should go, the market for a maid,
Singing inside her hut the maid
She comprehends. The simple maid
My pretty self-deceiving maid--
Remained with him the youthful maid.
In Olga's album, youthful maid,
Mine own ideal, the mountain maid,
Of a young dark-eyed country maid,
Her Martin Zadeka in aid,
To classicism I've homage paid,
Nor frigid adulation paid.
That bilberry wine, I'm sore afraid,
No time to pick it up! afraid,
Oneguine then approached and said:
"Poor Yorick," mournfully he said,
Tattiana doth accept his aid;
What they in conversation said?--
That certain volumes she might read.Adieu she to the matron said
Though scarcely following what was said,
With many a vacancy, 'tis said."--
In whispers low the neighbours said:
Vladimir something curtly said
So be it! Just the laws which bid
In mist profound all yet is hid.
Returning, from his ship amid
Wherefore am I your quarry held?--
She dreamt she journeyed o'er a field
Scornfully challenged you afield--
What are they? Gladly would I yield
"What can be done? She is no child!"
With an imagination wild,
Werther, rebellious martyr bold,
The wolf upon the highways bold
Zaretski, once a bully bold,
He laughs, although it aches from cold,
His mother from the door doth scold.
His housekeeper was wont to scold,
November at the gate did stand.The morn arises foggy, cold,
He took the room wherein the old
How empires store of wealth unfold,
I also wandered there of old,
"We never loved in days of old,
These evenings as in days of old
The medium is required of gold.
Is seen next pine-apples of gold.
Some marriageable maids behold,
In one he doth accounts behold,
Tattiana in traditions old
In dreams and what the moon foretold
Her Moscow cousin, often told
The Great World
She promised Eugene, or she would
Or kiss the border of her dress.To Olga frequently he would
Of friends unceremonious would
The Neva's Cleopatra, and
No one appeared to lend a hand.
Than health, so with a trembling hand
Heedless of your despairing cry?Eugene, his pistol yet in hand
Intoned it, manuscript in hand.
With the "Well-Wisher" in her hand!
Her foot was in my other hand.
Some wretched journal in his hand;
Of Africa, ancestral land,
With thoughts of a far distant land,
To agitate me in my dreams.When, where, and in what desert land,
In times gone by thy bare command--"
Sickness more courage doth command
Of a strange night when the moon and--
The poet, modest though so grand,
Those feet? Alas! on what far strand
To dream upon the sunny strand
With blessings on the ditches and
Immersed in secret thought I stand
To see you by our fireside stand,
None the conviction could withstand
"Oh! nurse, nurse, you don't understand!
Her tears flow plentifully and
To thy decree my will I bend.
To cock the pistol; barrel bend
To end with him her path below.To Love all ages lowly bend,
The thunderbolt on you descend!
Wearied of leisure in the end,
Learn Russian, but the Lord defend!
In duel having killed his friend
Will you?"--"Agreed."--"I thank you, friend,"
If not, the money I will lend."
Their natural attractions lend
His gusts should fertilize, amend,
Yet I in idleness expend
My days of life approach their end,
Into the starry night extend.
Quick to the country let us wend
To Dunia then they whisper: Mind!
His mournful heart no peace could find,
Where thine equal shall we find?
The young proprietor we find;
Upon the opening page ye find:
Scarcely in Russia can ye find
Of dreary Russia left behind,
"Your second you have left behind!"
Ye dreams of heavenly poesy?Perchance to benefit mankind,
Of which the rustling woods remind?
His immorality of mind
Oneguine's pencillings. His mind
One image occupied his mind,
It gradually possessed his mind;
Zizi, thou mirror of my mind,
That I to you reveal my mind?
So uncongenial to my mind,
Who dreams expound and prophecies.Brought by a pedlar vagabond
Of whirligigs were very fond,
However cherries might abound,
What jokes and guesses now abound,
Until her heart less high should bound--
Of clamorous geese flew southward bound.
These to the coach of state are bound,
Twice in the year to fast were bound,
The lancer, to his calling bound,
That mind which yearns for space is bound?
She wore her corset tightly bound,
Lo! in my garden was she found
This monument of thought profound
(This by command; for it was found,
Imperial portraits hang around
Selfish nonentities around?
The German baker looks around
The snows from off the hills around
Of horn in circle call them round.
Whilst struggling for the heritage.Soon Olga's accents shrill resound
Inside clink glasses, cries resound
Then handed her the song with grace.Congratulations, toasts resound,
Nor at the hour of noon with sound
The Russian N with nasal sound
Morning awakes with joyous sound;
Were stripped with melancholy sound,
"I with my friend intend to fight!"If he had only known the wound
Will happiness replace. My God!
Seven days and nights the travellers plod.
The fruits of science, evil, good,
Such is the country custom good;
The gossip of their ladies fair.Handsome and rich, the neighbourhood
Which in a hilly neighbourhood
Tattiana as enchanted stood;
Oneguine meditative stood,
Sees where a noble mansion stood,
Whose author nature understood
The river through the linden wood.
How I have erred and felt the rod!
The Country DamselCanto The Third"Whither away? Deuce take the bard!"--
Triquet arose, and for the bard
He was no more! The youthful bard
Here an old witch with hirsute beard,
In love's campaigns Oneguine heard
Her utterances ever heard,
What never was remarked or heard
When in the grand saloon was heard
Nor aught confides unto the rest.Tattiana would have gladly heard
Your conversation cold and hard,
The poet's madness? for 'tis hard
"I won't detain you; but 'tis hard
What doth she see? Around the board
Her Grandison was in the Guard,
The company deep silence guard.
He hies unto the "Boulevard,"
She enters a deserted yard--
Marmontel also, tome the third;
Whose qualities appeared to afford
She deemed its outline might afford.
Lo! my Oneguine rural lord!
Sighs on another than her lord
To dominate her worthy lord,
Reform me both in deed and word,
Together they returned, nor word
Oneguine wasted; on my word,
Seems so unnatural and absurd:
Of late I have been quite absurd,--
No more the music thunders loud,
With lengthened howl and accent loud,
Of my light paramour was proud.
He enters: in the hall a crowd,
Pursuits I followed of the crowd,
Or recognized not in the crowd.
Or he dispersed the motley crowd
Whither along them doth he pelt?Oneguine whither gallops? Ye
That girl--but he must dreaming be--
I would desire my bride to be--
Is still condemned in love to be;
Sombre or glad in turn to be,
He mused: "I will her saviour be!
Is it a dream, and can it be?
Long ago. Dream it cannot be!
Reader, whoever thou mayst be,
Or a swift meteor, may be,
Or reconciled them, it may be,
With worldly honours, it may be,
Lenski replied, and soon they be
Inseparable soon they be.
Whilst he "belle Nina" had the face
Time will the ravages efface--
No, ever to behold your face,
I never should have seen your face
Where the first time I saw your face,--
No more the village knows his face,
Pallid and melancholy face,
"She who with melancholy face
Oneguine--the beloved place
Her in the pitfalls which we place.
To the abandoned dwelling-place.
Why did you visit our poor place?
To follow you in every place,
Through clouds of dust at postal pace,
"Warm yourself here a little space!"
The boy was wild but full of grace.
The easier 'tis to gain her grace,
Inheritor of all his race.
What acrimonious scorn I trace
Of the commencement of the piece.
Stately, devoid of prejudice,
Was ready for self-sacrifice,
The shining river clothed in ice;
The hoar-frost glitters: all rejoice
In mother Winter's strange caprice.
The excited hero in a trice
Then they're so innocent of vice,
Two poles together glued by ice,
Of Christmas carols, song and dance;
Meeting you in times past by chance,
In serious mood or dalliance
Thine eye subdued me with strange glance,
His momentary loving glance
Who by a haughty word or glance
Warmth I imagined in your glance,
In thee, thou world of empty bliss.In groups, official striplings glance
Or will my melancholy glance
Upon the stage his weary glance.
The days of love and of romance!
Reviews both dress and countenance,
When people with long countenance
Seek the forgotten countenance
He yawns, averts his countenance,
I heard thy voice's resonance
Then would we muse as in a trance,
The hero's name too in advance,
Such open-hearted innocence.
Of her provincial innocence
Then to reward such confidence
Tattiana learns the intelligence--
Her amorous experience
He wanders in his indolence;
Oh! what had been his eminence!
I yield with a low reverence;
To friendship making no pretence,
I cannot tell on what pretence--
I, after so much eloquence,
Not to behave as he did once--
Or a good fellow for the nonce,
Our idol, Honour's motive force,
Lo! poured in a thin gray cascade,
It may be that his martyred shade
The murmuring brook, the woodland shade,
My lyre sings sweeter in the shade
Hid in the gondola's dark shade,
Whilst nearer, sunk in deeper shade,
There, there, beneath the side-scene's shade
In the Lyceum's noiseless shade
Was the first question Olga made,
He whom we sing to shall be made
Or better,--like a faithful wife.I was for calm existence made,
Straight for the entrance then he made
Though the foul vision promise made
Though late, have a beginning made.
Nor further comment that night made.
Whose heart experience icy made
They shovel silver with a spade,
The goddess would a masquerade
Were I like you a bard by trade--
His fate shall presently decide.
Like Leonora did she ride
She leisurely away doth ride,
"He promised here this day to ride,"
Or monster of Satanic pride,
Like Byron, bard of scorn and pride,
Unto the windmill he must ride
On horseback every day they ride--
Mute glances interchanged aside
In consultation stand aside--
Suddenly to the left hand side,
With me Caucasian rocks beside!
Yes, happy--though she at his side
Tattiana by a poor aunt's side,
If thou wert sitting by my side,
Jaws are at work. On every side
Meet punishment for him provide.
Oneguine oped the cupboards wide.
Noblesse and models of the mode,
Of a most mournful episode,
To foreign lands he would allude,
Secure in rural quietude--
Then, then--well, in some solitude
Where long time he in solitude
In worldly din or solitude
My soul is filled with gratitude!
Measured with great exactitude.
My scholar without aptitude
The poet's hour hath sounded--See!
To part in amity with thee!
Then, I say truly, none but thee
"Shall I proceed, or homeward flee?
'Tis hopeless! Homeward doth he flee
In snow she sinks up to the knee;
Tender and elevated, free?
When shall I wing my passage free
Impressed him in the least degree,--
Perchance he will to all the three.
Yet sometimes pages two or three
His valet brings him letters three.
Tome of "Malvina," and but three
Knew not an iamb from a choree,
Virgins miraculous I see,
Know that thy face that day I see.
My tongue is somewhat rusty now.Tattiana! sweet Tattiana, see!
The house and garden I would see."
The giddy world at last shall see.
Whither shall he go first? He'll see,
He usually was glad to see
"Olinka is her junior, see.
The letter is the thing, you see,--
Such was Oneguine's sainted life,
To move in fashionable life,
He in the early years of life
Who floats contentedly through life,
Whilst the fond parents, friends thro' life,
In many things had changed his life--
He knew not how to spend his life.
Should be respected throughout life
The die is cast! Thine is my life!
So be it! But internal strife
In aimless ease and far from strife,
Of error and the passions' strife.
The Muse abandoned, ta'en a wife,
Wherein the miserable wife
That I am rich, a prince's wife?--
Proud of his dinners and his wife!
Without profession, business, wife,
In boston and the game of age,
Or in a squabble to engage,
Sterner solicitudes engage,
Saint Priest, who every album's page
Or faults of grammar on its page--
With humble prose I'll fill my page
Thus having braved Apollo's rage
Remains on earth the unseemly rage,
The twenty-sixth year of his age,
To vary for a few brief days.For two whole days it seemed a change
Our godlike tongue she could exchange
The cool dark oaken grove to range,
Placed at the customary range;
Is sweeter than thy Helen foul.No one the contrary will urge,
Unto his own Tattiana he,
The traveller, bird of passage he,
That girl whom once on a time he
Sweeter it is, my friends, if he
Three mortal hours per diem he
Tania well nigh expired when he
Or Melmoth, gloomy wanderer he,
Voices and hands applaud, and she
Nor on the letter yet hath she
"Oh! I remember, where is he?"--
She oped her eyes and cried: 'tis he!
On such a day. O Heavens, 'tis she!
To Lucifer the cock must breathe
They first of all my brow did wreathe
No fond illusions live to soothe,
Men love no more, as only the
On Sundays by yon window he,
The family of children hie.
Upon the earth a mist did lie
When deaf and silent he doth lie
Wherein my poor old nurse doth lie
There the tired ploughman loves to lie,
There'll be a fight. I do not lie.
_Reveillez-vouz, belle endormie_.
Of youthful impulse, reverie,
Unknown to all, without a tie,
The bridge and alley to the lake,
The fever of the blood to slake--
Her promptings unto law did make,
I the same admonition make.
He deemed his friends but longed to make
Through park and meadow, wood and brake,
My sportive Muse I used to take
To burn, yet reason keep awake
Or any trifle else ye like
Pedantic although scholar like,
Of the horizon she is like!"--
"The post hath kept him, it is like."
Oneguine waits on us, 'tis like."
The comrade of your youth should strike,
"'Tis time to get up! Seven doth strike.
Our roads transformed the eye will strike;
Then suddenly discharge a joke
How artless was the note which spoke
The ladies' laughter to provoke.
Tattiana terrified awoke.
Nor the frost particles inhale
She, than the morning moon more pale,
How oft beneath the moonbeams pale
Oneguine's cheek grew ashy pale,
She trembled and grew deadly pale.
Thus we began our little tale--
Then it may be, O flattering tale,
The ball in all its splendour shone.I tried when I began this tale,,
Its waters to the neighbouring vale.
Honour and pride inflexible.
Permit me; is it worth the trouble
Regained authority awhile,
Singing in chorus all the while.
Thus the time passes and meanwhile
To see aught--never mind meanwhile)
The moment for revenge, meanwhile,
Though we, of Hymen foes, meanwhile,
Quite inadvertently meanwhile;
They crack a feeble joke and smile--
That afterwards with evil smile
To mark with a contemptuous smile.
Which your true friend with a sweet smile
'Twas built, the venerable pile,
Swearing how Lenski he would rile,
Scarce mindful of their love and guile.
They disappeared by stealth and guile,
Shall my declining years beguile;
The Russian language I deem vile
Long listen, comprehend the whole
In their sterility of prattle,
Preserves and an eternal prattle
Questions and news and tittle-tattle,
I owe the censorship a little.
The crystals of her vestibule
Though correspondence as a rule
He read the unbelieving Bayle,
He wrote ('tis the romantic style,
Her toilette's antiquated style,
To sketch ye in Albano's style.
In solid, unpretentious style,
Will be ascribed by treacherous Fame
The door flew open--Olga came,
Tattiana faltered, and became
Nor by her beauty she became
Will he pursue?--But no one came.
Tattiana waits. No answer came!
Her shoulder--Olga swiftly came--
Whene'er a brilliant courtly dame
The thirst of knowledge and of fame,
Time was the flattering voice of fame,
In hopes of everlasting fame
Strange unto her each childish game,
He takes his seat, concludes his game,
Horror of sinfulness and shame,
That vicious set whom I don't blame--
He kindled his poetic flame.
Scarlet as burnt by inward flame.
Is it that ardent souls of flame
Who knows? with love's consuming flame
More blooming than the Boreal flame
Lost in the hamlet far away.And in addition youth is flame
We are the first who such a name
You never would have heard the name,
Vladimir Lenski was his name,
She waits, on fire her trembling frame--
Her friend Monsieur Finemouche the same,
Pray is it he? It is the same.
Her wolf-dog and her husband tame;
The old Derjavine noticed me,
His character attracted me.
Of many an economic scheme;
Who reads his visionary theme
Of touching lightly every theme.
He with an innocence extreme
Who welcome guests with zeal extreme,
"My uncle's goodness is extreme,
Until the sleepless Breguet chime
Transported to our Russian clime.
On sunny days the glistening rime,
His footing on the treacherous rime
Sledging, the snows, which at the time
She is an angel! We sometime
Her figure perfect grows with time!
Hurrah! it long ago was time!
It now to investigate is time,
Which falls in starry flakes below.How in the country pass this time?
You will not all abandon me.
Though to the Academy I come
Tiresome unto her hath become
Straight from their province had he come?"--
I am in love, my hour hath come!
When will my hour of freedom come!
In winter time would often come.
Nor shall the caterpillar come
He wakes--they with a letter come--
Triumphant with the answer come.
To take a hand at whist oft come:
His name: the tenderness of home
Yes! for our unpretending home,
Long, long the hour had past when home
No longer through her former home;
Time was, two maidens from their home
The Princess N. will be at home
With his own pawn alas! his rook!Homeward returning, he at home
Tranquilly goes to sleep at home,
The bard his answer waits at home,
With better half as cumbersome;
That first the Muse appeared to me.
Mournful is thine approach to me,
What is thy cleverness to me?
Thy cheek is as a poppy red!""Ah! nurse, a favour do for me!"--
Howl like a dolt: 'tis meant for me!
Open the window--sit by me."
In the lone garden and the lane?
Oft staring through the window pane
Undeviating and insane
Of the domains of the side-scene.
Struck Lenski dead--across the scene
Pictures of the amusing scene,
The PoetCanto The SecondThe village wherein yawned Eugene
Tattiana motionless abides.The strife grew furious and Eugene
Such were the musings of Eugene.
Sincerely loving him, Eugene
."My second!" cried in turn Eugene,
He was in error; for Eugene
Who may he be? Is it Eugene?
She rose--departed. But Eugene
Our dear old aunt, Princess Helene,
He smiles, in laughter all combine;
Yet neither Virgil nor Racine
The master always used to sit."Departed Lenski here to dine
The sneers of critics superfine;
The lamps illuminating shine;
He could in disputation shine
Tattiana, saucy Olga thine?"--
'Tis Heaven's will and I am thine.
The kennel or a kindred line,
With many a snare their pathway line!
He was no fool, and Eugene mine,
No other than Oneguine mine.
Well known unto Oneguine mine.
Of modern Russians the disease.Bouyanoff, wrathful cousin mine,
In your young days and also mine),
Where art thou? Come! pretensions mine
Please follow this way, lady mine,
Of my impassioned heroine.
Never upon my heroine
The choicest flowers of French cuisine,
Is it for long?"--"Ma chere cousine!"
Lest the world or her lord divine
Long tortured by his lay divine,
I love them, O my dear Elvine,
Of the cup brimming o'er with wine--
With loud explosion, the bright wine
The sum of my existence gone
To pass the night at home hath gone.
Whilst cheerily the embers shone,
That hero, though his merit shone,
"Nurse, leave me. I would be alone.
Having for money's sake alone
Tranquil repose. Eugene alone
Of all the guests within his mind.Certainly not Eugene alone
When, sitting by his fire alone
'Twas these he read and these alone
To sigh and meditate alone:
In horror for itself alone,
On the steppes of Moldavia lone,
The river's bank. Tattiana lone
Undoubtedly, disdain alone
Maid whom my heart desires alone,
Waiting his coming--his alone!
Moina recalls for this alone
That mediocrity alone
Where, where, the trace of tears? None, none!
Though around honoured Priam's throne
In one great shout: she's mine! she's mine!"Mine!" cried Eugene with savage tone.
Said something in an undertone
She murmurs in an undertone
That like a friendly voice its tone
Lo! on the sleeping river borne,
The nightingale trills forth her tune;
Of fashionable dames the foe,
With Martin Zadeka. In woe
The aged woman in her woe:
Or quietly partake our woe.
His book-shelf instantly doth drape
'Tis dreadful--ye agree, I hope--
To whisper comfort, love and hope?
In country solitude you mope,
'Tis said you are a misanthrope,
On horseback gallop o'er the steppe!
His inner consciousness laid bare,
Through aspens, limes and birches bare,
I am acquainted with fresh care,
Tattiana's beauty, pale with care,
To cope with Ay no more I dare,
Lenski at intervals would dare,
The vile seducer shall not dare
Though I confess I hardly dare
O Men, how very like ye are
Or vainly 'mid luxurious fare
With Ozeroff was wont to share
I cannot help it I declare,
You with stern countenance declare
None could her beautiful declare,
The riot of the world and glare
The crash of music, candles' glare
What pleasures Hymen would prepare
If cleverly or not I prate.But, O ye tomes without compare,
Than one's own fascinating self.Here I remark all poets are
I ask, all ye who poets are,
Moscow's young Graces at her stare,
Tattiana's love was quite sincere,
Now I am fit for nothing here.
Which in the elevated sphere
The moon in the blue atmosphere.
"He's here! Eugene is here!
Or suffering pride? Why is he there?
With all their progeny were there,
I promised!--Did I so?--Well, there!
The young Simeonova too there
It may be ye were born, or there
"The left? Why, what on earth is there?"--
Was born beside the Neva, where
He bends his course to Talon's, where
I yield the fruit of work severe.
Just as he entered. How severe!
If the choice in my power were,
Still sovereigns of his spirit were,
Olga with trepidation dire.
Would haste in agitation dire
Oblivion of life's tempest dire,
Nor sparkled with poetic fire,
Or bosom full of languid fire,--
The proud ones are not worth the fire
Stood as if struck by lightning fire.
Our misanthrope was full of ire,
Their privileged allurements fire
With our Oneguine doth aspire
Yet still apparently aspire
He deemed his coming would inspire
Nor wit, nor did the same inspire
Whose tones Apollo's sons inspire,
So ardently did I desire
Raged round him and of balked desire!
To mutter her concealed desire
He felt the laudable desire
This world. I do not praise desire,
Slowly exhausted by desire,
His constant soul could ever tire,
The wit of others to acquire.
With thee I conversed when I bore
Within my memory I bore
Now buffoon, glutton, and a bore.
Within his mind Tattiana bore,
Opened with care, and entering bore
Tattiana, Russian to the core,
Or, as it were, the Freischutz' score
The Russian winter did adore
Whom doth thy plaintive Muse adore?
He was deceived. Just as before
Thou'lt suffer, dearest, but before,
They stir the heart as heretofore.
How oft to the Crimean shore
To help her to the other shore
Of the imperial Neva's shore.
The captives of the Salguir's shore.
Or by the ocean's rocky shore.
'Tis time to quit this weary shore
Society renounced once more.
With it may be a couple more;
With affectation,--nothing more.
Where Nereids murmur evermore,
Rooted unto the spot remained.As if against obstruction sore
Now the sweet little shoes she wore,
Rogue and extortioner of yore,
"Who would have thought it? As of yore!
Then my companions young with pleasure
In history he took no pleasure,
Yet still of anecdotes a treasure
"Sit down. How funny, to be sure!
In the unfettered hours of leisure
He will delight you, I am sure,
That my dishonour would ensure
Serious endeavours to assure
Ye need dissimulation base
That a friend's arm in every case
Still the loud stamping doth not cease,
Who tyrannizes us with ease,
The journey in a sledge doth please,
The damsel under escort place."Can I inspect the mansion, please?"
With childlike lisp will lie to please.
Possession hath no power to please,
Napoleon tarried till it please
O epic Muse, my powers increase
To cool the cutlets' seething grease,
If seriously he hath disease;
Though he surveyed her at his ease,
In motley and amusing chase.
The curs away to kennel chase,
Her shaggy myrmidon in chase.
Monsieur clean out of doors they chase.
Not even a poetic phrase,
I say without poetic phrase,
Moscow! How much is in the phrase
To russify the foreign phrase
Who every gesture, every phrase
It matters not. Hope e'en to these
She would pronounce _a la Francaise_;
She mourned and to the moon would raise
Of passion they so often raise.
To God eternal hymns of praise.
How sweet a dream your memories raise!
The curtain now they slowly raise.
They growl a bit--they scandalise--
Tired by the ball's incessant noise,
Miraculously fair arise,
Where melancholy rocks arise
Those hellish phantoms. Peals arise
Of the night sentinels arise
Thus thou, Yazykoff, dost arise
When Eugene like a ghost did rise
In column blue the smoke doth rise;
Oft upon friendly lips doth rise:
Yet sometimes banished hopes will rise
The Larinas were since sunrise
Late in the afternoon to rise,
The shopman and the pedlar rise
The crowd doth head and shoulders rise
He has returned, say in what guise?
Olga the tea must supervise--
He is a charming youth and wise.
Olga began to long likewise
"Is he the same or grown more wise?
The chief of the Chaldean wise,
Man--forty years long in this wise--
Or else ,
With his exasperated sense,
May be the empire of the sense,
He well-nigh lost the use of sense,
Pervaded with much common sense.
Reduced with effort unto sense,
Though now my love might be intense,
Inspired but weariness intense;
We hear with interest intense
Phials of crystal scents enclose.
Ladies in crowds around her close,
Malignant fury they disclose,
The windows whitened, shutters close--
Ne'er trusted to the treacherous ace.When, wise at length, we seek repose
Her smile and maidenly repose,
The pine-torch, by her crackles bright.Already crisp hoar frosts impose
Years to light rhyme themselves oppose,
He enters. High the cork arose
Of thankless friends the circle rose,
(Readers expect the rhyme of _rose_,
Years have inclined me to stern prose,
Too much I'm given to intersperse,
They met. Earth, water, prose and verse,
Or ice and flame, are not diverse
Round which revolves the universe.
That for that matter in my verse
Within his sledge the stiffened corse,
The speech of man and tramp of horse.
Loud paws the earth each panting horse,
Most usually a Cossack horse
In age the memory gets worse,
Of friends the grateful intercourse--
Snorts, and his rider bends his course
Oh, many a year hath run its course
The monsters of the British Muse
Now for the first time I my Muse
Incited by his stormy Muse
I lift a warning voice because
I once forgot for your sweet cause
The thirst for fame and man's applause,
The foaming Lenski would refuse,
Now I am ready to refuse.
Whose memory doth not refuse
With sudden flush her cheeks suffuse,
Poetic transport did infuse,
Ideas, desires and woes confuse
Ye mothers also, caution use,
One instrument for his own use--
Now, as in a deserted house,
Then became busy with the house,
"What can be drearier than the house,
Received him freely at her house,
Night separated from her spouse,
So hearken, every worthy spouse,
I would your vigilance arouse,
The drum already doth arouse.
Her steppe-like beauties I peruse
To my old nurse alone peruse,
My spirit with such pangs before.Another time, so willed it Fate,
Will not, preserved by kindly Fate,
They long ago had held debate.
They would not solemnly debate
My famous portrait indicate
I married--now, I supplicate--
    Indifferent and sedate,
The Lovelaces are out of date,
That is, he could elucidate
Told me to ask you. Ere that date
In fresh discourse. Such, love, thou art!He was most gay. The happy date
The story of thy life and fate.
Indifferent was her future fate.
On Lenski's matrimonial fate
She muses: "What was Olga's fate?
The peasant blessed his happy fate.
The servants used to congregate
Tend not my heart to mitigate,
The hostess doth interrogate:
He nears a spacious mansion's gate,
"Your fashionable world I hate,
With her they did associate,
Sometime collected, shall relate
"He hath neglected us of late."--
The time for mystic strolls which late
In charming fashion mutilate?
Lessons to give he understood!How soon he learnt to titillate
That year the autumn season late
Two hearts perchance were desolate
Longtime was her heart desolate
Shall surely, be it soon or late,
Squeeze tiny hands and osculate;
The world enough. Congratulate
Reserved, but not inanimate,
Just at the hour we designate
Sweet to behold him obstinate,
Of life or death predestinate.
I had found my predestinate,
Perchance one more affectionate.
He marmot-like did hibernate,
Must be pronounced unfortunate--
'Tis fearful to anticipate
The Larinas would celebrate,
To whom your hearts were consecrate,--
To whom we used to consecrate
That chosen heroes consecrate,
Her manners were deliberate,
Spoiled children most degenerate
You in the least commiserate
Or "Idol mio," and in the grate
His double sashes and his grate,
If but to lighten Time's dull rate,
When o'er a glass with friends we prate
Shifts, tacks about, until they prate
The fatal bullet penetrate,
Where turmoil cannot penetrate,
To-day, my friends, at any rate,
Your frankness I shall compensate
With jealous fire resuscitate,
On thee I used to meditate!
Whom vice, if named, doth agitate
Rescue me from oblivion.Perchance some heart 'twill agitate,
The matter did not agitate,
The secrets of the marriage state
The sorrows of a single state.
These take their seats; the coach of state
I am not strong enough to state;
My heart of old would captivate.
My soul I cannot renovate--
The Fete
They have invited you this week.""Me?"--"Yes! It is Tattiana's fete
In bud of promise incomplete,
The weary way still incomplete,
Wrapt in oblivion complete,
Without them Eugene is complete;
Who the romance do not complete,
With tears, confused emotions, bliss,--With unanimity complete,
With this unpleasant _tete-a-tete_,
Nor yet her lip compressed did bite.
The fervid poet would recite,
When poets lachrymose recite
Was certainly not erudite
Though dazzling its effulgence white,
Winter resigned her empire white,
Its ebullition foaming white
Nor sudden turned she red or white,
Their insolence and waistcoats white
Her house he enters, ghastly white,
The converse of the world polite,
Highways all Russia will unite
The girl in marriage they unite.
Nor even tears afford respite,
I have endured without respite.
Trembles upon my lips from spite,--
She wanders aimless as a sprite,
Who thrives this moment as I write,
I would, my friends, inscriptions write,
Whilst Eugene condescending quite,
Nor died nor lost his senses quite.
The vestibule finds empty quite--
Lenski his comrade did invite.
On innocent delights I dote,
I on my chosen hero dote;
On balls I madly used to dote,
'Twas then in valleys lone, remote,
With "vale" finish off a note;
Or the delivery of a note.
She heard of servant-maids the note,
Your innocent and charming note
To purest love he tuned his note
In spring-time, heard the cygnet's note
The letter which Tattiana wrote.
When in simplicity ye wrote
So let us to the ball-room haste,
His chair, plate, knife and fork in haste;
We must admit but little taste
More satisfaction to her taste.
This anchorite amid his waste
Subscribed, _toujours a vous, Annette;_
In the beginning, cold and mute,
Whilst homeward by the nearest route
My country's honour and repute
None could a trace of that impute,
Her all in all did constitute;
Poltroons and men of slanderous tongue,
Oneguine knew enough, the rogue
Latin is just now not in vogue,
Her locks were of a golden hue,
Her eyes were of cerulean blue,
Like smoke athwart the heaven blue;
The heavens shone in deeper blue,
He racked his brains to find its clue
His vanity first let us pique
Thou also, my ideal true,
'Tis time to marry her, 'tis true,
No novelty--is it not true?--
"Then, in the country, is't not true?
I did not please you. Why pursue
He called upon me Christmas Eve--
Without the faintest trace to leave
My mournful fate in verse to weave,
Was it not so?--for thee I gave,
Into delicious bondage gave
The prejudices all men have,
Tell me at once what wilt thou have?
Her shoulders, breast and face to lave--
My heroine, Tattiana dear.Vladimir, hourly more a slave
To shallow sentiment a slave!
The fatal secrets of the grave,
My guardian angel to the grave.
Lament, embrace upon that grave.
The moderns of the ancients rave--
The Lord deliver her and save!
Thus to assassinate the eve?"--
To mention the foregoing eve,
Not the young timid maid, believe,
To standards in which we believe?
These are your relatives, believe:
Just at a moment which I grieve
When angry beat her maids, I grieve,
Shrill sang the _samovar_ at eve,
To jest as he had done last eve,
I love you--to what end deceive?--
That we by cant ourselves deceive,
Where is he who doth not deceive?
What I by relatives conceive?
"Not at all."--"That I can't conceive!
In clouds of steam above perceive.
To me he would his Olga give,
Of "comme il faut." Shishkoff, forgive!
Time without me will lessons give,
The most industrious man alive
Would whisper: shall I so long live?"--
So meantime let him joyous live
Mutual destruction to contrive.
When that time comes, a poem I'll strive
What boots it with the age to strive?
I can't translate the adjective.
There our Katenine did revive
My heart with but one look revive;
That guests approach: and when above
None, be my witness Heaven above!
The moon, the lamp of heaven above,
O Spring, thou chosen time of love!
The all-entrancing joys of love--
To swagger as the art of love,
I love you with a brother's love,
With tears which secret sufferers love--
The malady of hopeless love
This lot in life with stern decree?"Ideas and time ne'er backward move;
My spirit and my blood doth move,
Whom jealous transport cannot move,
Maidens before her meekly move
Thus mused a madcap young, who drove
'Twas then he loved the tangled grove
If Olga smilingly approve,
Time was when cold seduction strove
Young ladies, if ye ever strove
Vexation? Vanity? or strove
The blood boiled and the passions strove.
Lo! the prim cat upon the stove
Polite demeanour to preserve,
To strike imagination serve.
Young ladies in a vasty curve,
Him who inspired both love and awe,
With footsteps tremulous with awe
Striking the intellect with awe
Now we must separate. Good-bye!
When the hour came to bid good-bye--
To bid the gentlefolk good-bye.
"Ye peaceful valleys all, good-bye!
His hand, and fell. His clouded eye
To arm the tongue and e'en the eye,
Walking? The landscape tires the eye
Upon your daughters keep an eye,
To raise his pistol to his eye,
Tattiana gazed with curious eye
I've scanned it with a jealous eye,
The verst posts catch the vacant eye
The cynosure of every eye.
Whose brain no fond illusions daze,
On iron bridges we shall gaze
On everything around her gaze,
Looks upon all with absent gaze
Tattiana gently led them there.And long her eyes as through a haze
No, never in the early blaze
On pit, stalls, boxes, brightly blaze,
Madman, wilt thou from memory raze
Still they blow noses, cough, and sneeze,
Let not the poet's spirit freeze,
Him a disquietude did seize,
Nor the first snow of winter seize
The hero we immortalize.
Who now could fail to recognize
The calm existence which I prize
Having lost all in life we prize.
They made him feel inclined to doze;
Is ever ready with relief,
This great discovery relief
Who in the agony of grief
To whom are our misfortunes grief
With deeper woe than others' grief.
Our union would produce but grief.
Who arrived lately from Tamboff,
Loud snores the cumbrous Poustiakoff
The family of Kharlikoff,
To write of any other elf
Then dressed himself...
Stood as estranged from all aloof,
In spectacles and chestnut wig.
The language of her girlish pleading
Page after page continued reading,
However, Tania's letter reading,
Whom you in slumber may have seen."But she, her sister never heeding,
Istomina the nimbly-bounding;
Oneguine's letter!"--"Ah! the thing!
I guard it as a holy thing,
I have it. Lo! the very thing!
Shone pungent Satire's dauntless king,
I'm o'er it ever pondering.
The world is ever altering!
Plates, knives and forks are clattering
Or, parable more flattering,
To our Tattiana conquering,
Upon the meadows showering,
Some other long-departed Spring,
Ye golden days of my young spring?
In life domestic see a string
That I forget not whom I sing.
Of Volga fishermen doth sing,
Rousseau, I would remark in passing,
Her suit before my parents pressing:
Then the old dames in chorus sing,
To happiness contributing.
Wafted upon poetic wing,
The tiresome man, her value knowing,
Of pictures painful harrowing,
Yet curses on his fate bestowing,
Metreless verses recognizing
Who following Petrarch move along
The days which to your youth belong?
Visions, now sad, now grateful, long
She gazed--a cue, forgotten long,
He thought to write, but labour long
The lively trash of stories long
Weeping they loosed my tresses long
The nightingale there all night long,
"_The date, his fleeting years how long--
Terpsichore alone among
Thus haughty, careless in her tone?He quits the fashionable throng
To whom amongst the jealous throng
"Nothing, good nurse, there's nothing wrong,
With little knowledge and that wrong
Repose in peace, thou child of song_."
She brought with her the gift of song.
With dance and with song.
Spring's paramour, pours forth her song
Of maids dost thou inscribe thy song?
Let me explain that in my song
Since I beheld Eugene and young
"I celebrate a comrade young
Her sisterhood delights the young
Without disgust we look upon?Happy he who in youth was young,
His harp beneath that sky had rung
He who life's frosts which early wrung
Of love which whilom Petrarch sung.
Where sometime Goethe, Schiller sung,
The words _bear, bridge, fir, darkness, bog,
Raven, snowstorm, tempest, fog,
His entrance with Oneguine. "Ah!
Make up your mind to go there."--"Ah!
The native Russian tongue impeach?
How meekly then I heard you preach--
To-day it is my turn to teach.
Was the old and forgotten coach;
The neighbours come, in sledge approach,
Or to disturb my dreams approach
Her antiquated mode of speech,
Many an ancient legend which
Would she the canvas tight enrich
In monsters and fair dames was rich;
Who to surrender did not blench
With gay design and silken stitch.
I formerly admired her much
No coquetry was there, I vouch--
You'll find her portrait there, I vouch;
Nor the _Journal des Modes_, I vouch,
Society endures not such!
'Tis dark. He seats him in a sleigh,
Ye shadows of a life more high,
My doom has been pronounced on high,
With great delight.--O God on high!
"I call to witness God on high--"
Sails her allotted course on high,
The tiny sun shone less on high
Of churches, gardens, belfries high
Ye well-known mountain summits high,
With effort she restrains. Well nigh
List! the snow crunches--he draws nigh!
When separation's hour drew nigh,
Nor tender glance nor amorous sigh
Heaved an involuntary sigh
There is no wreath upon the bough:
In scenes like these it may be though,
How dark the night is getting though!
His breast was riddled through and through,
To guess how you the eve pull through."--
My venerated reader, oh!
They sent their compliments--but oh!
Spurs of the Cavalier Guard clash,
Some madrigal not worth a rush,
He lies, upon his forehead death,
Was sleeping then a sleep like death;
Or counting on his uncle's death
Who early died a gallant death_,"
When motionless your gaze beneath
"_Vladimir Lenski lies beneath,
Two hearts, a torch, of flowers a wreath,
Would agitate a mystic wreath
You o'er your wine insulted hath--
Seen all, beside himself with wrath,
Impatient, boiling o'er with wrath,
Zaretski bit his lip in wrath,
Or even overcome by wrath
Without the ken of parents both,
What doth he act? Is it Melmoth,
I must resign myself, in sooth;
The dusty chronicles of earth
To dire contentment shall give birth
He salutary rules poured forth?
Impelled by zeal for moral worth,
The last poor obol I was worth--
Ombre, and whist all others worth:
Where youth ?
Restrained the impulses of youth;
To the impressions of our youth,
My frivolous and jolly youth.
Thee only would I choose, in truth,
O my Svetlana.'--Joukovski
The brilliant Nina Voronskoi,
Mutual repulsion and ennui,
His wadded coat and cap with peak;
To listen to the words you speak,
Vows matrimonial to break,
Openly or 'neath decent cloak.
Himself transformed into a hack;
Passes the torrent But alack!
Placed in a sledge his terrier black,
In truth he had the happy trick
Whose memories make the heart beat quick
Tattiana blushed, her heart beat quick--
He loved the simpleton to mock,
The artful prisoner should seek
Or, it may be, we inly seek,
His Hellespont from bank to bank,
He enters the saloon. 'Tis blank!
Till out of breath upon a seatShe sank.--
He's a freemason, so we think.
Yon silly moon upon the brink
Vladimir closes up his book,
Was uttered, and the cabin shook--
His fist Oneguine fiercely shook
Into accounts would sometimes look,
How bright and tender was his look,
To flight before her radiant look,
The little solitary nook
His course unto the running brook.
Which crushing dignity must brook!
Where shining runs the tiny brook,
'Tis here he slept, his coffee took,
How thoroughly her part she took!
To ask her name the trouble took.
Jealousy and vexation took
Till absently Vladimir took
The shepherd plaits his shoe of bark,
The sad moon only could remark.
'Tis a Madonna of Vandyk,
They deem her somewhat finical,
Of a heart cold and cynical?
Ye men of fashion cynical,
Of untold gain she must conceal,
When the mazurka used to peal,
In vain my anxious eyes appeal;
What sad emotions o'er me steal
What will the coming dawn reveal?
Outlandish and provincial,
Her glance how wild yet genial!
Lo! with what pride celestial
Nought of its charms original
Yet suffering emotional
He deemed of human life the goal
The path which leads to glory's goal.
The eyes of a grave general.
In one thing really did excel.
When first upon my cheek I feel
The love, hate, sorrow, joy, we feel.
The parquet cracked beneath the heel,
On him spleen mounted sentinel
To such--delightful to repel.
Though of romance therein I fail
Lifts not her eyes which swimming fail.
With eye precise and without fail.
In time I'll give ye without fail
Winter's approach she doth not hail
The sharp incisions of his nail,
Within its wave the sounding pail,
She runs, the bear upon her trail,
Sorrow to counterfeit and wail--
Herds low, and under night's dark veil
To slay himself with blade or ball,
Nor study, banquet, rout nor ball
Yet as a rule their talk I call
She soon forgot, began to call
Was that which we are wont to call
So, when he came next day to call,
He drinks, all drink and loudly call;
The rigour of cold pride and all
Lofty the chambers one and all,
They blossom, ripen and they fall
Some future ignoramus shall
Nor years of separation all
Indifferent he became to all,
Her sentimental verses all,
The twilight pale which softens all,
'Tis now the season! Idlers all,
Morality taught scarce at all;
They shout and no one lists at all.
Was not surprised thereby at all.
He knits his brows--'tis silent all.
I envied sore the billows tall,
Silk tapestry upon the wall,
Lord Byron's portrait on the wall
Hung like a print against the wall,
Shouts, laughter, jamming 'gainst the wall,
The inscription o'er the gates of Hell
To take this letter to O-- Well!
Long in this fashionable cell
The lady's glance upon him fell--
Lenski, unhappy victim, fell,
Himself just like a greenhorn fell.
Repentance wields not now her spell
Of languor and of love did tell
'Twas not the first time, I can tell
The steward sent a note to tell
I am--in love--you know--don't tell!"
Unto our neighbour. Mind you tell--
Who from two years to thirty tell;
I have no leisure here to dwell,
Thou beauteous sky above, farewell!
"The family are all quite well--
How thy hands burn!"--"Dear nurse, I'm well.
Ye groves whose depths I know so well,
Scissors both straight and curved as well,
His relative and friend as well.
This separated us as well--
Petoushkoff, the provincial swell;
"My heart's delight, thou art not well."--
Your heart possesses, I know well,
Oneguine acted very well
My unpretending page shall fill,
Of thy delights I drank my fill,
Proceeds, until she from a hill
The pervert world with icy chill
Let us proceed unto a rill,
'Tis now the hillock now the rill
To listen to the rippling rill.
"'Tis habit, Lenski."--"Is your ill
His heart reciprocated still
The coach before a house stood still.
"How now, Oneguine, yawning still?"--
Or couplets more ingenious still;
Seeks, winding amid meadows still,
To wander through the meadows still,
With tumult or contentment still
You fall in love again. But still--
Time was, the poet's tender quill
No more at dawn the shepherd will
Thus a guest with composure will
To stay the maid against her will.
'Tis evidently Heaven's will
Indites an inconsiderate scroll
Perchance they laurels also cull--
Rings from a dish of water full
Perched on a goose's neck a skull
In order due the maidens pull;
You know that I am now a fool--
He was a dear delightful fool--
He used to hate--and was no fool--
Learn to possess more self-control.
"Monsieur l'Abbe" a starving Gaul,
Would soothe the doubtings of his soul,
Now don't be cross with me, my soul,
Of your perfections in my soul,
They laugh, they argue, and they bawl,
He a polite reply doth scrawl.
The memory of the bard, a dream,
Whilst all creation seemed to dream
The story of his young love's dream,
To the fair object of his dream,
I will descant on love's sweet dream,
Of happy meetings thou shalt dream,
Tattiana in a misty dream,
Thou'lt quaff love's sweet envenomed stream,
Thinking to float upon the stream,
The fragrant tea in darkling stream,
Of rural life the sluggish stream;
Will be absorbed by Lethe's stream;
Perish absorbed by Lethe's stream.
Our youthful wanderer should roam.
'Twould serve ye in an epigram--
Torquato Tasso's strains I deem.
'Tis something of this sort I deem.
Merciful God, what will he deem?"
Providence otherwise may deem--
Of priceless value all things seem
With mute appeal to ask they seem--
He hath acquired the world's esteem
In three weeks would arrive for them;
The foes, as yet not taking aim,
Is ever ready to proclaim
With such a perversity proclaim.
Pink as Palm Sunday cherubim,
In winter by its blank and dim
Of what not, and of distant dim,
Silent, oracular ye'd see him
Its driver seated on the rim
He sang of separation grim,
Motionless, mute, tight-laced and trim.
In scarlet sash and sheepskin trim;
In some a willing martyrdom.
She waited for--I don't know whom!
Petoushkoff met the selfsame doom.
Thus age approached, the common doom,
The fountain brawls, sweetbriers bloom,
Perish when half disclosed its bloom!"--
Her health, life's sweetness and its bloom,
Oh! on the fields of life how bloom
Was the sad poet filled with gloom,
The forests in mysterious gloom
This is my master's sitting-room.
She nerves herself from her alarm
The amatory science warm,
In thy imagination warm,
Laid down his life of sun and storm
Indeed, by force of magnetism
How like a poet was my chum
He "Benedetta" used to hum,
He had excepted from the ban:
Meantime I'll finish whilst I can
Romances three, in which ye scan
'Twas plain--an oaken floor ye scan,
Oneguine slowly then began
Interrogation to denote.And my Tattiana now began
Zaretski, village mechanician,
Suitable for this semi-Russian.
To write in cantos twenty-five.I've thought well o'er the general plan,
"How came you then to wed a man?"--
Vladimir's property, a man
More clearly, God be praised, the man,
Let me present ye to the man,
He was an honest gentleman,
Long ceased to be a reading man,
Portrayed contemporary man
I feel, allotted is my span;
"Why, as God ordered! My Ivan
Two cupboards, table, soft divan,
Portray the solitary den
Perchance upon the Neva e'en
In her friends' albums, time had been,
There friends of pure delight had been
Its passions and its modes of thought.The butt of scandal having been,
Which never have existed, e'en
My joy in youth was fleeting e'en
Repose from labour, satire keen,
What a storm of emotions keen
Their looks alone produce the spleen.
Was nothing but the British spleen
The lonely mansion-house to screen
It blew: it howled: till winter e'en
Upon a bunch of lovage green;
In springtime on the meadows green,
To this arrangement can be seen,
Nor precepts sage nor pictures e'en,
Similar dames ye may have seen.
The torment born of crime unseen,
How! from the waste of steppes unseen,"--
"Oh! how our years are vanishing!"But nothing changed in them is seen,
In little maidens of thirteen?
In bullets, sabres, and in fight.His malady, whose cause I ween
Writ in my honour now and then--
Her husband was a bridegroom then,
"Oneguine, I was younger then,
His friendship I acquired just then;
The cold reply with gloomy mien
The tale of these romantic men;
To pass with reasonable men
Whom, as the custom is of men,
With taffety instead of crape.Having abjured the haunts of men,
So inaccessible to men,
Is no more cherished amongst men.
Where is the outlaw, banned by men,
The poet fell; already men
Yawning betook him to a pen.
I know that Parny's tender pen
Of serfs the farewell wail have given.
The imagination to enliven
Nags eighteen to the door are driven.
The memory of the bard was driven
Oneguine was a citizen
How deftly could he transport feign!
Olga and Tania led. Malign,
How bitterly he would malign,
With roses, caps and looks malign;
Landscapes thereon he would design,
My heart's allegiance can resign,
Men opposite. The cross they sign
My gratitude do not disdain,
To crush me with a just disdain.
Listen to me without disdain.
Should dearly like a dance again.
Shall I behold thee once again?"--
The youthful lover once again
Oneguine, bored to death again,
Oneguine--take him up again--
That until Christmas comes again
Of love again, and yet again;
Or if he meant to flirt again,
It wakens in my breast again.
Tattiana courage doth regain
He there is master--that is plain;
Zaretski rose, nor would explain,
Without disguise ourselves explain.
Who selfishly unmoved remain
He obstinately will remain,
Me now, inflict upon me pain?--
Spare yourself unavailing pain
"My darling child, thou art in pain.--
Where, where, remorse, compassion, pain?
I know not if his heart felt pain
Kibitkas three, the accustomed train,
The bard's enthusiastic strain,
Of bassoons and of flutes the strain.
Oh, how her lips compressed restrain
Yet dares not, dedicate its strain,
The dream left terror in its train.
Or e'en the "Demon" of my strain.
I loved you--what did I obtain?
Tania the meaning would obtain
My light productions to retain,
The household property contain:
His daughter's book to ascertain
Pair after pair the race sustain.
Lenski the stroke could not sustain,
Still hopes, endeavours, though in vain.
He reads at random, reads in vain.
I've wasted in amusements vain,
Wherein we lately left the twain.
The converse of our hermits twain,
To raise a clamour and a din:
In solitude or worldly din,
Three tears they dropt with humble mein
With words of foreign origin
The pall of night was growing thin,
He heard his soul's complaint within,
Still everywhere, without, within,
Where--"--"What! another eclogue spin?
Zaretski with a knowing grin,
Pardon I ask for such a sin--
Until her powers of running fail.She sank upon the snow. But Bruin
In books he saw nought to condemn
"Here, he resides with Simeon.
The torrent of opinion,
Recent instructions of its mother.But Tania ne'er displayed a passion
The natural fickleness of passion,
The youthful poet's fond confession.
Shall abdicate the bard's profession,
My friends, what means this odd digression?
With quite a lachrymose expression
He enters: rapidly discussion
Who without more prevarication
We all of us of education
Oneguine went with trepidation
Tattiana saw with trepidation
With inexact pronunciation
Must now my stanzas occupy.Tattiana was her appellation.
The God of Love is after you!A coquette loves by calculation,
Upon her cheek by adulation
Killed! at this dreadful exclamation
Not high in general estimation;
Of such a dread hallucination.
Invigorate imagination
Long time her young imagination
Original imagination,
She did not think "procrastination
Of foreign whims the impersonation--
Triumphant by anticipation,
Their Jealousy and separation
The fair of the next generation,
Whose glance reflecting inspiration
The idols of their adoration
In pages of a love narration
The hero is of my narration!
The poet's fervid conversation
Introduce verse in conversation.
Without constraint in conversation
Not knowing its interpretation,
Which is he? or an imitation,
Thy meditative incantation--
Thus, praised be God! a reputation
Seeing in this no deprivation,
To the sarcastic observation,
With intellect and strong volition
Meantime Oneguine's apparition
Lenski the foeman's apparition
Quite a sensation; the position
My very latest composition!
The same unmoved oblivion
Was worthy of that old baboon,
Tattiana gazes on the moon,
'Tis silent--on her shines the moon--
Well! just as she was yesterday."Why did you leave last night so soon?"
Submissive as if in a swoon,
His wife was also mad upon
Our fathers used to dote upon;
His head sinks slowly, rests upon
His spirit was intent upon.
Still for ever fare thee well.'--Byron
Herself not knowing well the reason,
The counsel good and full of reason,
To visit Moscow in the season.
The works of Mr. Richardson.She was thus fond of Richardson
The sleep-compelling Grandison,
Or that adoring Grandison
Was certainly no Grandison.
Sailed silently in unison--
There an imperious skeleton;
The sharp flint, screwed securely on,
My verses, kindly meant, would earn
To ask forgiveness seemed to yearn;
To write his forefathers to warn
He eyed her with a fond concern,
Tattiana--thus the sex is born.--
Viewed them with not a little scorn,
Silvers the brook; the shepherd's horn
Looms gray behind the mist and morn
Pale as a ghost and dressed since morn
Which 'neath her pillow lay till morn.
Sweet as the kiss of lovers sworn.
Of the sun glisten; muddy, worn,
Perchance you also soon may burn,
My wretched Lenski's fate I mourn,
To visit, lovely maid, return,
Or, heedless of the leaves' return
Then to some gallant in your turn
Men will forget me, but my urn
To freeze his finger hath begun,
Yonder the household lad doth run,
Swift following in her wake, the sun,"
Time was, the breath of early dawn
Hung on a pine branch earthward drawn
In silence shall I sit and yawn
There is no path; the storm hath strewn
Hopeless are all the first, I own,
The untutored spirit's pangs calmed down
Mushrooms for winter salted down,
Their branches by the snow bowed down.
Her on a shaky bench sit down;
I feel thou wast by God sent down
The aged nurse in ample gown,
In a half-open dressing-gown
You never since your nose have shown.
Thus her perversity hath shown.
The opportunity is flown.
Upon my visions such intrude.Fresh aspirations I have known,
Still happier he who ne'er hath known!
What everybody long has known;
He is not there: I am not known:
Kept the accounts, shaved many a crown,
She bows her head beneath the crown;
On raptures, sorrows not her own,
Have one by one all withered grown
Is cocked once more. Uneasy grown,
"Ideal," he had drowsy grown.
Slept o'er the river misty grown.
Lenski, into confusion thrown,
Her heart more loudly and more fleet.She hesitates, in doubt is thrown--
Like rotten leaves by Autumn strown--
When will the devil take his own!"
Impelled to union with his own
Troy's sages should in concert own
He left _you_ first, and I must own
Must visit them. Come! you must own,
Present me."--"You are joking."--"No."--
More troublesome than usual?"--"No!
"To--?"--"Larina."--"Tattiana?"--"So.
Made me so tipsy long ago!
To romp and play she ne'er would go:
Her lips where light smiles come and go!
Matrons unto the fireplace go,
They hand in hand to table go.
Whither at headlong speed doth go
Incorrigible rogue, doth go.
Whither that evening he will go.
Kept lingering on as loath to go,
The crafty spouse caressed him, who
Yea! and a man of honour, lo!
His daily occupations, lo!
I cannot understand. But lo!
The pompous, swaggering cuckold too,
Pen, paper bring: the table too
My beauty, thou art ready too.
Inspired him with disgust and so
"Shall we commence?"--"Let it be so,"
That soon I reach my thirtieth year?And so my noon hath come! If so,
"I'm happy, say, is it not so?"--
No more remembered him; unto
Together moments one or two
Zaretski paces thirty-two
Or a professor in tulle cap.
The lady in the crimson cap
When captured in a schoolboy's cap;
He from his Kalmuck horse did leap
Which o'er the waters boldly leap,
He's a straightforward little chap."
Or at a promenade mayhap,
With iridescent wing doth flap
His song, when still he slumbered deep,
Mountains we'll level and through deep
Long time in meditation deep
Whilst Petersburg from slumber deep
In mud and mire to wallow deep,
Is waning. Yonder valley deep
The maids beside Tattiana keep--
Her path across the plain doth keep--
Your steed, though rough-shod, cannot keep
My poor Tattiana cannot sleep
Wrapped in their sheepskins soundly sleep.
In sensual sweets his soul doth steep
The sun had mounted high his steep,
Like down from Aeolus's lip,
With one foot resting on its tip
Was it not thou who thus didst stoop
The sudden rattling of a car.
Since in these arms I thee did bear--
I can't conceive a little dear
His cup unto his maiden dear.
Of roses to romancers dear;
Unseen thou wast already dear.
Or e'en Istomina, my dear,
Not only sorrow--Ah! my dear,
Wholly beside herself with fear,
Omens inspired her soul with fear,
The path of hope and tender fear--
They wish that ladies should, I hear,
Terrible tales she loved to hear.
She will not see, she will not hear.
To be in conversation clear
There is a spot the village near
With sad refrain misfortune near.
Mysteriously all objects near
These friends cold-bloodedly draw near
My neighbour, who by chance drew near,
When youth's rebellious hour drew near
He daily in his drives drew near
Shy, silent did the maid appear
Love to inspire doth woe appear
Still doth the misanthrope appear?
Never for me to reappear--
Would once in powdered wig appear;
Unknown to all he doth appear,
Two dressed in uniform appear--
Thou didst to me in dreams appear,
The shining orbs of night appear;
"How Tania grows! Doth it appear
More advantageously appear
In the dawn of existence drear.
The aspect of a landscape drear.
The coming of life's Autumn drear.
He bending whispered in her ear
Will sound an insult in your ear.
Modest yet daring! And a tear
The simple epitaph--a tear
O'er my remains to drop a tear,
I then resolved my heart to tear;
Yet still her heart, which torments tear,
Old women at the coachmen swear.
Long ago?"--"'Tis the second year."
Unhappily too salt by far;
Or the mysterious Sbogar.
Just placed the entrance door ajar.
The swain of Julia Wolmar,
Malek Adel and De Linar,
Though hitherto a lady ne'er
To lawless love I should prefer--
"Well!"--"I the elder should prefer,
Romance of love I pray refer,
Tania doth by the casement linger
"The younger, you're in love with her!"
Unfavourable unto her.
He leisurely adorns for her.
Not a bad fellow was her father
Though superannuated rather;
To Eve the universal mother,
Servant of God and brigadier,
On waves by tempests curdled o'er!
His bit with foam besprinkled o'er,
Together we have wandered o'er
Now her lithe form she arches o'er
So ancient warriors, battles o'er,
Spanned the unbridled torrent o'er;
Where dwelt the Muses' worshipper,
Malicious and a slanderer.
I'll sprinkle thee with holy water.--
This was his social character.
What is his latest character?
Moscow, Russia's darling daughter,
"The Lord be with thee, O my daughter!"--
Thy Venus and thy Jupiter,
I'm beaten in another matter;
Where better?
Hope with her fascinating power
Who for the greenwood quits his tower,
I tremble lest my humble prayer
On Trinity Sunday yawned at prayer,
Is occupied with Olga fair,
Still eats and drinks enough for twain.Their daughters kiss Tattiana fair.
To cheat the inexperienced fair,
To clank the spur, delight the fair--
Pray is it not a tough affair
The storm was hushed. The blossom fair
I have dreamed many a vision fair
Is it not true? the objects fair,
Rural LifeCanto The FourthThe less we love a lady fair
I uttered to my lady fair
With the epistle of my fair;
Pallid and with dishevelled hair,
Her tears and her dishevelled hair;
With hurried hand smooths down his hair.
He knows Kaverine will repair.
The freshness of her heart impair,
Yet still remains the old despair.
Sometimes by ready-made despair;
Lo! my Oneguine free as air,
_Kvass_ needful was to them as air;
Urging your droshkies swift as air
The Eternal Jew or the Corsair
Mark ye with what a modest air
'Tis _yes! no!_ never _madam! sir!_"
Petrovski Palace; come, astir!
She cannot draw a breath or stir.
She cannot--Eugene oped the door
She peeped through a chink of the door.
Olga ran skipping from the door.
Upon the ball-room's glassy floor
Oppressor of the wretched poor;
Lest the malicious reader or
Is petted by the Emperor?--
Some one or other editor
Opens unto her visitor.
The bard of Juan and the Giaour,
Impressionable for an hour,
I blame not your behaviour--
Lo! at thy feet my tears I pour
Pelagie Nikolavna has
Oneguine fired--Alas! alas!
In this case quite mistaken was.
Still of his club he member was--
With purple hand Aurora leads,
With tranquil air Oneguine leads
His wife approaches, with him leads
To two young oaks the coachman leads.
That crass stupidity misleads,
Which to the neighbouring alley leads,
She the delicious novel reads,
If they but heard domestic loads
"Then come with me." The prince proceeds,
She drinks in those seductive deeds!
Professions eagerly for deeds,
The crowd unto the drawing-room speeds,
The Okhtenka with pitcher speeds,
To bring behind: the triple steeds
The languid eye of love-sick maids,
Tattiana to a corner, bids
In winter, when Night longer holds
His son and mortgages his lands.
Nor beauties of far distant lands
Nor homage which the Muse demands
Obedient to warm Spring's commands.
Thus in the earth the seed expands
The steed benumbed still pawing stands
The father scarcely understands
Where each young critic ready stands,
With bated breath, around she bends
The avalanche of snow first bends,
Tobacco smoke the flue ascends,
Tattiana from the hill descends
Then glittering in the sun descends.
No one my anguish comprehends,
The voice of lovers, foes and friends,
Of frivolous existence, friends;
The feet of my dear lady friends.
Their harmless conversation blends
The deuce take friends, my friends, amends
His hate by slander, and who spends
On us beyond the grave attends,
O feet, where'er your path extends
With love which happiness extends;
Sits by her gloomily, desponds,
Scarce to her questions he responds,
The girl on tiptoe forward bounds
Of passion reminiscences,
Its cold unfeeling sentences;
My goddesses, where are your shades?
'Twas he whom, amid nightly shades,
The remnant destiny concedes,
The unbidden guests he roughly chides--
In scarlet cap revolving glides.
Leisurely through the gateway glides.
Sits down and gazes on all sides--
Of migratory gipsy hordes--
Moscow approach on bended knees,
Whom autocratic fate's decrees
May be that I by heaven's decrees
To understand by slow degrees
The serpent to unlawful trees
Not the least trace Oneguine sees
Like Horace, planted cabbages,
Of thirty different sorts, lo! brushes
She fears and like an arrow rushes
The shutters open; to the skies
Of the moon in the tranquil skies,
Where all upon the surface lies,--
Slumber still o'er him lingering flies.
Look through the window and kill flies.
Tattiana to the index flies
Lamp-posts, shops, sledges, families,
O'erwhelmed with guests; by families
When the same life before him lies
What more's required? The world replies,
Luceria Lvovna paint applies,
His friends and also enemies
The general who accompanies.
To bear love's parching agonies--
Thrice happy who their agonies
Her cheek reclines upon her hand.Oh! who her speechless agonies
She from the winter corn espies
Some a mazurka occupies,
He roars, and "Ah!" Tattiana cries.
'Tis silent all! Alone the cries
Upon those pages she descries
Past palaces and nunneries,
In the world's mortal revelries,
With raspberries, cherries.
To peer into the future tries.
To watch with lovers' ecstasies,
My splendid house and gaieties--
Than cold Oneguine's oddities,
I yield for splendid vanities,
The gilding of life's vanities,
Who glory, wealth and dignities
Spared him not their asperities.
The country hath its liberties
Upon her tongue which fever bakes.
Of mines and meadows, woods and lakes,
The doors swing open: Lenski makes
The guests make room; aside each takes
He now a full possession takes,
Without grammatical mistakes.
The third at night. Tattiana wakes
May be, and this my terror wakes,
The mallet loud the ramrod strikes,
His recent glory he invokes.
Time, I invoke thee! favouring gales
She got a book of nursery tales,
The coach is borne o'er ruts and holes,
'Tis not so now. Like gentle dames
To banish far unworthy themes
To whom ye for unnumbered crimes
Which we experienced long ago.Alas! he loved as in our times
I sail upon my lake at times
The fisher's fire afar illumes
Whom pale Diana's ray illumes--
Mad spirit of the man who rhymes
Her head upon her breast declines
Upon her elbow she reclines,
Longer the East inert reclines
Upward in a thin stream inclines.
Wherein love innocently pines.
The golden ember now enshrines,
Yes! every one must have his foes,
Now, like hereditary foes,
Straight from the ball to bed he goes,
Into the tangled garden goes
Winter! The peasant blithely goes
The accents wild of other's woes,
With hisses Cleopatra scares,
He fixedly upon her stares--
She calm and unconcerned appears.The husband comes and interferes
The wondrous host of heavenly spheres
Then seeks ancestral sepulchres,
Imagination's sacred fires,
White Moscow raises her old spires,
Jackdaws on every spire--in scores.
Seated, a curious look with glasses
Shouts of applause! Oneguine passes
In true interpretation hates:
Which in your spirit dominates,
Nor in his dreams anticipates
_Qu'ecrirer-vouz sur ces tablettes?_
Rings, tears, deceptions and intrigues,
Her bosom heaves whilst crimson hues
Which shines with iridescent hues.
When thoughtless youth whom nothing grieves,
Twelfth Night approaches. Merry eves!
Who dressing-gown and slippers gives
Thus our light race grows up and lives,
He enters: to the mill he drives:
He long should have been on the road.He rings in haste; in haste arrives
The appointed hour arrives, arrives!
Our liberty at least survives:
She the acquaintances she loves,
To the pianoforte he moves
Her spacious fields and shady groves,
To dreams I long have closed mine eyes,
Your smiling lips, your beaming eyes,
Of frantic laughter, and all eyes
Not daring to cast back her eyes.
Sudden she stops, casts down her eyes
Tattiana, dim with tears her eyes,
Olga he sees before his eyes
Where every day before his eyes
His travels like all other things
_The peasants there are rich as kings,
Obedient to the magic strings,
With late repentance gnaws and stings.
Slow circling round its fellow swings
The time between the wolf and dogs--
How pleasantly the evening jogs
Secret excursions made in sleighs;
Thine honour is my countersign!Tattiana moans and now she sighs
"Oh! what a fool our neighbour is!
I just hint, in parenthesis,
If ye but knew how dreadful 'tis
Lo, the ambassador who speaks
Who with the Spanish envoy speaks?"--
The old man who has had his freaks,
Lo! compassed by his grove of oaks,
However, the mazurka lacks
The prince's eye Oneguine seeks:
The very morning of our days.He who hath lived and living, thinks,
He who hath suffered ofttimes shrinks
In the meantime her spirit sinks,
Was the meek love a maiden feels.
Still thirst fresh draughts of wine compels
May yet be studious of his nails;
The early tinkling of the bells
Which of approaching labour tells
When the sonorous Breguet tells
Past women, sentry-boxes, rolls,
Impelled by Spring's dissolving beams,
Her eye with fire unwonted gleams.
He perished. Where his troubled dreams,
'Oh, do not dream these fearful dreams,
This wicked, that absurd he deems,
Their memory lingers still and seems
This nonsense, that dishonest seems,
Or, when anew all Nature teems,
Of conversation, thought and aims--
No gift she bears, no feast proclaims,
Where harsh frivolity proclaims
When evening o'er the landscape looms,
In Olga's and Tattiana's rooms
In tranquil flow. The beetle hums.
The secrets of maidens.
Insensible her hand remains
His kneeling posture he retains--
To secrets of virgins,
Priams of country populations
The olden time shall be my theme.Old people's simple conversations
Their offspring's innocent flirtations
Latest arrivals' salutations,
They were the wonderful traditions
Prophecies, threats and apparitions,
Tails which a bushy tuft adorns,
With blunted pencil-point adorns.
Whiskers and bloody tongues and horns,
With flame more ardent passion burns,
Her heart importunately turns.
Take to their wings and fly away.But to Oneguine! _A propos!_
Its stamping, capers and high leaps.
In country towns, where still it keeps
'Tis silent all. Tattiana sleeps.
I will not wed, and ever weeps
Impatiently the gallery stamps,
The two friends' compliments she hears
Without participation hears,
The silent fields no peasant nears,
Tattiana in the yard appears
Mournful Love's deadly trace appears
Nearer they come--Eugene appears!
With his ferocious mate appears.
Her sacred hoard of joy and tears,
Her weary eyes are filled with tears--
Likewise an epitaph with tears
The aged mother, bathed in tears,
Not, and a flood of bitter tears
My poor Vladimir, bitter tears
Her cap of tulle still ever wears:
With Eugene pranks of former years
(So 'twas with us in former years,
The solstice of our earthly years,
Portmanteaus and preserves in jars,
Have shone as one of fashion's leaders.
Oneguine, O my gentle readers,
Should recompense his idle jeers,
Old age through spectacles too peers,
The jealous dame her lorgnette veers,
Tattiana certainly infers
The hamlet, the poor villagers,
If his hot hand encountered hers,
Her garden, and those books of hers,
She ne'er repeated unto hers.
Nor almanacs nor newspapers,
Huts, chemists, Cossacks, shopkeepers
Spring summons you to her green bowers,
Youth freshens beneath Passion's showers,
'Tis the warm time of labour, flowers;
Of Levshin's school ye followers,
Nor boston nor the world's affairs
Saucepans and mattresses and chairs,
To the theatre he repairs
He to the festival repairs,
'Tis day, the family downstairs,
With one paw strokes her face and purrs,
To swathe her shoulders in the furs,
Judge then what roses would be ours,
I see you weep. Those tears of yours
The manners of the highest class
Would loiter by the looking-glass,
Unseen in thick and tangled grass
Yet satiated with success,
There was no angling for success.
In the world's vortex my success,
Tattiana in the young princess!
Trembling he seeks the young princess--
Thus oft--this I myself confess--
"If the domestic hearth could bless--
Me your perfections would not bless;
How flourish, why and wherefore less
With fir-trees standing motionless
Speech was so tame and colourless
To loiter there in idleness
The happiest days of life employ?Love, flowers, the country, idleness
Her heart how full of gentleness,
Tattiana finds in loneliness.
In melancholy loveliness,
Her cheek of rosy loveliness
He _cannot_ give me happiness."
"'Twas possible then, happiness--
Or, strange to me is happiness?
Oppressive now is happiness,
With laughter smothered weariness:
Their slander e'en was weariness;
In old age life is weariness!"
This glitter, riot, emptiness,
In rhyming I show laziness.
I murmur not! Why mournfulness?
I thank thee for thy joyfulness,
Where my days in the wilderness
With spiritual tenderness;
Inspired by whom this tenderness,
The bays of age and helplessness.
My lot is fixed--with thoughtlessness
Is it that human restlessness
"Oneguine, all this sumptuousness,
Illusions, dream, where, where your sweetness?
Those whom we ought to love, caress,
Whose hands indulgently caress
The ladies, their fantastic dress,
Her eyes no saucy glance address,
To array himself in evening dress.
Meantime in matutinal dress
Nor dares the skirting of her dress
She hears the bear behind her press,
Her feet the earth beneath her press!
She starts, nor doth a word express,
To fawn upon and love express;
"Is he known to you?"--"Yes and No."Wherefore regarding him express
I like the difference to express
Inflict annoyance and distress
Her agitation and distress
Love's tender transports and distress,
Nor discontinued to distress
Hymen's embarrassments, distress,
Tattiana's letter I possess,
If wife and children to possess
If the raw product they possess
Her nurse, who could have made a guess,
This gentle daring who could guess?
The uncontaminated kiss
This evanescent boyish bliss.
Sound sleep, books, walking, were his bliss,
I've had to make for having friends!But how? Quite so. Though I dismiss
Soon the maid on a chair he seats,
In the meantime the mill inspects.
Leaning against the dam expects,
Their coming which no man expects,
Of slumbering citizens he fleets,
Whom latterly one often meets
Though without palaces and streets,
Past darkened windows and long streets
Not seeking love but sensual sweets.
The fire of the nocturnal lights;
Thy heroes, sanguinary wights,
With rapturous longing he awaits,
Will teach grammatical conceits,
The maiden at her casement sits
With cherries, red currants,
Its splendour and its blandishments,
The epistle from the bard presents.
She visited the humble tents
Two pines have joined their tangled roots,
To Olga Petoushkova darts:
The flimsy wares of Western marts,
Meantime a Cyclops of those parts
We Russians, friends from distant parts
The Paris of those country parts
Variety of speech and vests,
Though for his Helen Menelaus
The stomach doth admonish us.
Whereto in language courteous
Yea! although rendered beauteous
To witticisms and taunts half-vicious
The conversation tedious
Oh! who is not calumnious?
There Didelot became glorious,
Or to pick up her kerchief stooped.She seemed of him oblivious,
With satisfaction marvellous,
How mean, how pusillanimous!
The drive becomes monotonous--
Then ye were barely generous,
It was a cheery, generous
He shunned those parties boisterous;
Well! Larina appears to us
Who labours hard to humour us?
Us, and like Trojan warriors slay us;
Sharp rows of tushes, bony claws,
The friend of liberty and laws
The tightened leathern rein she draws,
His watch, the sun in turn he views--
Perverse, unfavourable views?
To male acquaintances he bows,
The men salute with lower bows
The epitaph on marble shows:
With all dissatisfaction shows.
Misunderstanding, words and blows.
Mends with the Russian hammer's blows
When Passion's fire no longer glows
Profiles of lovely dames he knows
The first appearance of the snows
His pony sniffing the fresh snows
Upon the dreary northern snows,
Through dense aristocratic rows
On unknown female forms he throws.
The connoisseur his glances throws
O'er hillock and o'er meadow throws.
Men become friends from idleness.But even thus not now-a-days!
Of fiery youth's untutored days
Moscow, how oft in evil days,
We called to mind our youthful days--
That vanished are my youthful days,
O triumphs of my guileless days,
Whilst Morpheus his approach delays,
In one of thine enchanting lays
Or Bogdanovitch's sweet lays.
On the blue blocks of ice the rays
Her hand for the cotillon prays.
No more with pale Diana's rays,
With which blind Fortune oft betrays
Nor interest in aught betrays.
When he in ardent verse portrays
Oneguine his excuses says;
Till the mazurka's close he stays,
Streams excavate subaqueous ways,
Unto Anicia for the keys
The household troop of little boys,
Sleep in the shadowy couch enjoys,
Who cannot conjure former joys?
She gazed thereon, and instant beat
Unless forbidden fruit we eat,
There the confusion, pressure, heat,
Nurses who scream and babes who bleat.
With lovers' rubbish filled, was neat
The passionate speeches I'll repeat,
I mean my name not to repeat."
I might to connoisseurs repeat
Which lessons unto us repeat,
Now all things round about repeat
Of woods and fields the calm retreat,
When in the study's calm retreat,
Removed her to his country seat,
"No misery I see in that"--
Since words like pantaloons, vest, coat,
Upon my lake I love to float,
My friend, 'tis but to pay a debt,
Her brow she did not e'en contract
Of keen sarcastic intellect
With so much warmth and intellect?
The perfidies I recollect
Two verses he could recollect
Where I can no more recollect?--
Should make me much more circumspect,
So prudent, and so circumspect
The glass unwittingly inspect
Such am I. This did ye expect,
The disenchanted glass direct
Of the AEneid, but incorrect.
So full of piety, correct,
Herein my portrait should detect,
Wherein the child of fashion strict
Three pairs of handsome female feet;
Long ago, prostrate at her feet.
Young ladies' faces and their feet.
The flowerbeds skirts, the brook doth meet,
O Brenta, once more we shall meet
The miserable bard to meet,
Where fashionable circles meet
Your magic voices I shall greet,
Her with a smile old women greet,
Near Khariton's in a side street
That my coy Muse might sing more sweet.
That heart with inspiration sweet
The words and looks of charmers sweet
"To whom is it to go, my sweet?
"Look quickly to your left, my sweet!"
Wherein I castigation get;
Without enthusiasm he met
When in her walks abroad she met
Where God alone knows whom she met.
The hour when--Fate so willed--we met
Of one thing till again we met.
Then in the silent cabinet
Of widow Clicquot or Moet
Thy dove, thy darling little pet
The landscape which the moonbeams fret,
Tortured by pangs of wild regret,
The fair, nor parted with regret,
It will be by a mob beset
On whom a sister's heart was set
Of every sort and every set!"--
Whilst on the floor Monsieur Triquet
Or parody of modern ways?Hath she found out the riddle yet?
Where in the country Eugene yet,
'Mid worldly pleasures chased him yet,
Oneguine, hast forgotten yet
"Then amongst strangers I was left--
Of consolation all bereft--
Who secretly denounced the gift,
Though deep he sinks into the drift;
Unto his neighbour, man of thrift,
Raises within my breast as oft
Will to the old times faithful be.Speech careless, incorrect, but soft,
The misty evenings ere Twelfth Night.
In vehicles surcharged with freight;
Philosopher just turned eighteen.China and bronze the tables weight,
To many a noisy feast and fight,
That, tipsy once in actual fight,
The crowd and merriment and light,
The voice of jealousy is drowned.In my young days of wild delight
The curse of commonplace delight.
His spirit sank with strange delight.
_Who in thy love finds more delight
The colonel sent it. Oh! delight!
To find in gossip such delight,
In such an album with delight
They will receive us with delight."
He finally lost all delight
His ardent soul with full delight.
The votary of vain delight
Would she in silence long remain.Contemplativeness, her delight,
My pen no longer finds delight,
I love its furious delight,
The Muse revealed her first delight,
When tea was brought. 'Tis my delight
Or but for fame he saw the light;
There came a sudden flash of light,
Having remarked Vladimir's flight,
Pour on this orb a dazzling light
Was withered ere the morning light--
His care unto his pistols' plight,
Her movements, voice and figure slight,
That the two friends with morning's light
Like Hippocrene it scatters light,
The firmament in mellow light,
Was younger than myself, my light,
Yet clearer shines than every light
The ladies' dresses airy, light,
Of sunset glow with rosy light,
If in the scenes of home I might
The china teapot too ye might
Time was, a valiant general might
Resounding through all ages might
Lay languishing both day and night--
Terror of guardians of the night;
Outside descend the mists of night.
The moon, the stars, and shining night--
So there will be a dance to-night.
My morning birdie, yesternight
That glimmered through the radiant night
Spins, whilst the friend of wintry night,
In the first place, say, am I right?
Seductive, animated, bright,
His ditties were as pure and bright
The motley moving mass and bright,
Life lies extended, vast and bright,
When I yon semicircle bright
The goblet still is bubbling bright--
Was it not thou, O vision bright,
In winter on the fender bright,
Thee only, pledge of all things bright,
O'erspread with Winter's carpet bright,
To youthful Olga's beauty bright,
I was half silly with affright.
Other and colder thoughts affright,
Paris and Menelaus right.
Once more, when she appeared in sight,
The height of fashion, fitting tight,
I am not worthy them in aught;
If they were similar in aught.
'Tis foreign to my cast of thought;
Of harmony enshrining thought.
'Tis noisome to her there: in thought
Immersed in melancholy thought,
Lived as a really wise man ought,
The seemly crowd, partaking nought
She hears of conversation nought
The languid mind could smile at nought,
In Tania's praise in pouch he brought,
Like a true Frenchman, couplets wrought
Of splendid carpets richly wrought.
My memory wandered wide and sought
The early days of life we sought.
Though by an error and unsought--
The "in memoriam" pages sought,
With measured step and even gait
On guests their servants used to wait
Must take a walk and rest a bit--
Yet sometimes this or that deceit
Though we will not acknowledge it.
Or, with a pen and colours fit,
Some day I'll somehow finish it.
On winters of the south a skit,
Whither shall my rapscallion flit?
The table with its lamp unlit,
Oneguine could not now submit,
He somewhat blushing would omit:
Her heart: it seemed a darksome pit
This he believed: a kindred spirit
Who in the orchards gathered fruit,
So mouths they stopt with song, not fruit--
Renowned for his acumen, wit,
The beldam saith: "The hearth, by it
The snow upon the streets doth melt--
On fresh allurements they are bent,
The needle nor, o'er framework bent,
His butting horns in anger bent,
In the unmoved, magnificent
Like a full moon magnificent.
Now talkative, now reticent;
Who would the maiden innocent
Of affectation innocent,
Near young Tattiana resident,
That Heaven her character had blent
With jest and gossip gaily blent.
Ne'er touched her fingers indolent
Stiff, overstarched and insolent,
Or torturer malevolent?
True friend, landlord benevolent,
I'll pass beneath the firmament,
Shines in the female firmament
With scandal's trivial ornament.
To what malicious merriment,
It may be, I yield nutriment!
Hopes, frolics, dreams and sentiment
Tattiana tears cannot restrain.The limits of enlightenment
Having this mournful document
With epigrams impertinent,
Two minutes they in silence spent,
Wherein a space Oneguine spent.
Since leisure was together spent,
She struggled hard at first thus pent,
Obsequious or indifferent!
The foes with downcast eyes abide.Foes! Is it long since friendship rent
Now it is ready to be sent--
"You have a letter to me sent.
Their heroes used to represent
Time-honoured Kremlin's keys present.
Who art thou? Guardian angel sent
To a surrender gave consent,
Into thy hands my fate I yield!No answer! He another sent.
She heaves a sigh and deep intent
So Tania to her heart's content
In course of time (the whole extent
Serve who could neither read nor write.Time was, in style magniloquent
Remained unnoticed. Once he went
Into the lonely house she went,
Perused, Eugene in postchaise went
'Tis time she to the altar went!
Not so! My Moscow never went
Oneguine to the window went
The Larinas unwisely went,
The poor girl fell into a faint,
His sunken eye and aspect faint,
Imploring looks and mute complaint
Long since I held thee at the font--
In spite of common sense we're wont
Ourselves as unities to count;
The bear rolls on with many a grunt:
To labour in his sledge forgot,
Then, the far capital forgot,
What once I knew is clean forgot--
Oneguine lightning glances shot;
Philanthropist or patriot,
Zaretski and Monsieur Guillot
His Frenchman, good Monsieur Guillot,
In poor Moldavia cast her lot,
Inseparable from our lot;
My country and an exile's lot;
Spite of herself with Lenski's lot
To Russ indigenous are not;
Just at this moment I cannot.
One moment's slumber suffer not.
Keep your accounts! You'd rather not?
        Where man is not.
Into the district then to boot
Rousseau and Richardson to boot.
Yet viewing her from head to foot,
Was a delightful little spot,
Our bridges long neglected rot,
Just manages a feeble trot
Madame de Stael, Bichat, Tissot:
Nor true unto her sorrow kept.
Just before dinner-time he slept,
Into the chamber where he slept
Subdued him, when his neighbour stept
Thee but a little space bewept,
Wherein I felt love's fatal dart,
Rekindled in my withered heart
Imprudent prattle of the heart,
Obeyed the impulses of heart?--
Unknown as yet the aching heart,
Presentiments oppressed her heart.
The indignation of her heart!
Method was dear unto his heart
The fashionable rhymester's heart!
Within her; she is sick at heart;
Wherein I buried left my heart.
The fires of passion and its smart--
Then touching Olga they depart
Who this soft nonsense could impart,
May well in innocence impart.
Their voices nought to her impart
Poetic transport. They impart
Her passion's faithful counterpart,
Would at the proper time appear.How well he played the greenhorn's part
How soon he learnt deception's art,
Sometimes by pleasing flattery's art,
Which from the devil's bookcase start,
His own antagonists expert,
The heart of the inveterate flirt!
To accompany him and to escort
Manzoni, Herder and Chamfort,
Her girlish gaiety and sport.
When the obedient doll in sport
Like a Bacchante in her sport
With pungent or obtuse retort,
There is no fishmarket retort
Vociferously paid her court,
Not bristled up like a wild beast,
That youthful heart--"But, now at least,
He seemed for matrimony born.He was beloved: or say at least,
She hid the trouble of her breast,
She buries deep within her breast
"I weep. And if within your breast
Which rankled in Tattiana's breast,
The fire extinguished in his breast,
Use subterfuge, and thus his breast
To ease the anguish of my breast.
Longtime her tears flowed thick and fast;
I by the button-hole seize fast
Poetical enthusiast,
Must e'en despise his kind at last;
The fatal hour had come at last--
She found herself alone at last,
Vanished his youthful years at last,
Or, after dinner's dull repast,
Scarce credits what his eyes can see.Hark! the mazurka. In times past,
The laws of generations past,
In Russ her love made manifest,
Is once again made manifest.
No sense was ever manifest
To treat the matter as a jest,
Heart would not throb albeit in jest--
The credulous indeed are blest,
Just so! that modest swain is blest
Like you and me and all the rest?--
Let us go seek a little rest--
Ye feel but little interest,
Now with what eager interest
Having once fixed your interest,
Or, beyond Lethe lulled to rest,
The body they consigned to rest,
His weary head declined at rest,
With this immoderate request
Their idols they were wont to invest
With what avidity and zest
Unto the sounding sea to list,
She led me through nocturnal mist
Their own productions, some insist
So many neighbours here exist--
They may forget that we exist.
No greater pleasure can exist
That every morn at Verrey's cost
Whither departed is the host?
When in as instant she is lost,--
Three flasks of wine he might exhaust.
To light had brought them from their dust,
O'er all a sheet of silvery dust
Who words and actions will adjust
There! take it quickly, if ye must).
Satan will jest, and at love's cost.Oh! where bestow our love? Whom trust?
Inns there are none. Pretentious but
Meagre, within a draughty hut,
See, I can hardly crawl about--
Who with a scuffle and a shout
Now Didelot scarce can be endured!"Snakes, satyrs, loves with many a shout
Within resounded shriek and shout:
Their claims and explanations shout.
Yelping, a pack of dogs rush out,
Whilst the tired serving-men without
Lenski his pencil-case took out
In the broad meadow a gay rout,
Of creditors a hungry rout
His comedies, a noisy rout,
"My chum lives here," Bruin grunts out.
Sarcastic Shakhovskoi brought out
The wind rose instantly, blew out
On lines invisible are fixt;
His eyes, the printed lines betwixt,
Perusing Gibbon and Rousseau,
To the young girl he said adieu,
The time when Melancholy's claw
Obedient then to Nature's law,
He offers her his murderous paw;
When in that company she saw
Her tresses curled in fashion saw,
He in imagination saw
The woods, still naked to the view,
Russia's Terpsichore review
Incessantly his chains to break."I still a complication view,
The altar flame was quenched in night.Tranquil he lay, and strange to view
She never more his face may view,
Shall I your chorus hear anew,
Thus trees in spring their leaves renew
Scarce hadst thou entered thee I knew,
My little book. With thee I knew
(Though certainly mankind he knew
Of drawing-rooms or old or new.
The triumph of a conquest new.
Replace the visions fancy drew;
I flushed up, stupefied I grew,
Heavy his heart with anguish grew;
Or letters of a maiden young.And by degrees upon him grew
Moscow
Who can help loving mother Moscow?
To look on life as on a show,
Villages in the distance show
What languor would his silence show,
To-morrow Tania we will show,
Would you to me this Phyllis show,
Unto a carping world must show--
Nearest and dearest knew not how
He back as from a sudden blow?--
Morning's forerunners, breezes blow
They are all natural and low,
Park, garden, palings, yard below
Us from the world wherein we live.Meantime, drink deeply of the flow
Seductive cup of love, whose flow
With its exhilarating flow,
Or did her tears soon cease to flow?
Nought from his pen did ever flow,
Where plentifully feelings flow
They sat, but conversation's flow
How full of fire his speech would glow!
Whose countless golden crosses glow
Maids in the corner whisper low;
Then, eyeing Olga, whispers low:
With folded arms and eyes bent low,
To the youth Eugene hurried now--
Society he duped enow."
The unaffected traits she now
"I am in love, nurse! leave me now."
Then they came easily enow,
Its insignificance I know
No obstacle of which I know.
You choose."--"But who is she?"--"My wife.""So thou art wed! I did not know.
"Inform me, prince, pray dost thou know
"Tania, my eldest child, you know"--
Now gloomy seemed and cheerful now,
Her handkerchief she loses now;
The first bright wreathing storm of snow
Till January fell no snow--
Of woe: effaced the pathway now:
Is ever thus. With frowning brow
The cold sweat bursting from his brow,
The misanthrope of gloomy brow,
Till carriage lamps, a double row,
How perfect doth our epoch grow!
The horizon luminous doth grow,
Nought but of dinners a long row,
How charming Olga's shoulders grow!
'Tis a scene of romance, I vow!"
The Muse capricious let us coax,
The bee forth from his cell of wax
We glide along a floor of wax.
In love, although its tempests vex,
Of diplomats and warlike beaux
I prefer sensible Bordeaux.
We visit about Christmas Day,
Then get mad drunk or wroth; the day
What, invitations? The same day
Unto their solitude one day,
Impatient waits the close of day,
To anticipate the break of day,
To-morrow before break of day,
Listless is she the livelong day
He sat, and then the livelong day,
Well nigh her heart in twain was cleft.In cruel solitude each day
In haunts of fashion where each day
Jilted--glad of a holiday.
Spectacles upon nose, all day
He enters. Ah! good news to-day!
The ruts of his own fatherland.Yet on a frosty winter day
To-morrow just like yesterday.
Nor shall the bud of yesterday
She gazed around her--it was day.
Olga's admirer came that day:
That he was "ready any day."
She was as heedless and as gay--
Time was, his raillery was gay,
In yarns of youthful troopers gay,
Till morn--life uniform but gay,
"How often in thine arms I lay;
The bridegroom sage without delay
One morn whilst yet in bed he lay,
No senseless fashionable lay
How sick to death his uncle lay
With pallid light, but Eugene lay
Within his memory there lay,
Then, her distraction to allay,
In jersey and in nightcap lay.
How with thy medal I would play,
The military band will play.
Was wont with me at cards to play.
'Tis there that arrant fops display
Lo! through the frozen windows play
To make wise men the idiot play
He would not that a man ye slay
Like D when dinner doth inspire.Destiny hath preserved his lay.
In the beginning of this lay,
Unto the hero of this lay
Restless Tattiana sleepless lay
Have smuggled his flagitious lay.
Who, heard the music of my lay,
Was drawn, ideal of my lay--
Some army poet therein may
That grandmothers and grandsires may
Or by a card our homage pay,
"Who? Is it that stout general, pray?"--Let us congratulations pay
To see his Olga ere the fray--
With boiling torrent dark and gray;
"'Tis time, my child, arise, I pray!
Which rushed in eager dense array
Here bottles stand in close array,
His intellect in close array.
The trees in silvery array,
Nor doth my absent pen portray
Minutely I will now portray.
Tattiana purchased with a stray
She sits alone--'tis ever _she!_So frequently his mind would stray
Thither hussars on leave will stray
Transfixed Oneguine mine doth stay.Is this the same Tattiana, say,
Surveying them, she thus doth say:
"Tell me, why doth your comrade stay?"
He cared no longer there to stay,
Horror! had she not better stay
Nor did her blushes fade away,
The starry beacons fade away,
Oneguine Olga bore away.
How oft the kindly Muse away
Without a chance to slip away.
The mystic lines to tear away
I write, and anguish flies away,
It whiled his idle hours away
The lily's stem to eat away,
Unto her husband, went away--
With serious air then went away
On thigh or temple, friend on friend.Resolved the flirt to cast away,
There jars of cider block the way,
His furs are powdered on the way
In a lax or informal way,
He still made love in a queer way;
Unto the fields she makes her way,
"Oh! whither have ye winged your way,
Impetuously clove its way
Ivan Petrovitch still a gaby,
Simeon Petrovitch just as shabby;
Oneguine sat the table by
Stops at the tomb in passing by;
No trace ye left in passing by
The whirlwind of the waltz sweeps by,
Nor by her sister's brilliancy
Possessed nor ease nor fluency,
Hearing the fatal perfidy?
Tania, observed by nobody,
More crimson every moment they.
To idle musing was a prey;
May find a crumb to satisfy.
He ne'er shall hear Time's eulogy,
She fears she cannot.--Cannot? Why?--
Possess my love and sympathy.
The witching light of sympathy;
I cannot tell the reason why,
When on the pallid eastern sky
The nights of golden Italy
Presents her quarto amiably,
Nor shall my pen paint terribly
Upon his couch insensibly;
Tattiana asks, and hurriedly
What agitation languidly
"No matter, look immediately.
Took aim--but as immediately
Or innocently past me fly.
Tattiana would attempt to fly,
Thus shines the wretched butterfly,
The feet of graceful ladies fly,
The evanescent fashions fly
Unto the gates the servants fly
I long have ceased to offend the laws.Alas! life's hours which swiftly fly
Though he advanced unceasingly.
"Who will be there?"--"The family.
What say you? to the family--
Petrovski Palace! Gloomily
Mute, solemn, frowning gloomily.
So from the mountain lazily
I would not part with finally;
With him were friends eternally:
To all she answers cruelly--
Or other mask donned playfully?
Thus shakes the hare when suddenly
His transports were quite maidenly,
"What! Grandison?"--"Yes, certainly!"
The reaping girls approach and ply
Prevailed at last. She in reply
Her caps and night-dresses to mend.As for her spouse he loved her dearly,
Though I'll return to him right early,
That all may hear his voice's tone.Thou fairy-land! Where formerly
Like Venus when, capriciously,
Or into bold hands anxiously
You'll spend your winter famously!
In the French language perfectly,
Known unto children perfectly:
"Then send your grandson quietly
Tattiana suffered secretly;
Then he'd malign them secretly
To lay two covers secretly.
Turned to her and discordantly
Oh! I accept. And instantly
The same warm vision constantly;
She cannot--then impatiently
With clouded brow stands silently?
His son is married, just conceive!""And he--but of him presently--
Three balls a year he gave ye duly,
Having performed his service truly,
The artifice of villany--
He brought from mystic Germany
The captain of a company.
There, in that knot of company,
Wallow, my friends, in company!
The man and liked his company,
I thank thee. In thy company,
Then be it so! My destiny
Thou hast resigned thy destiny
There is no stupid calumny
Their giddy sports she ne'er enjoyed.She loved upon the balcony
It occupied him from a boy,
Into the study of the boy
Instructed jestingly the boy,
Not a mere hot, pugnacious boy,
Which in the winter were a joy:
In idleness and tranquil joy
Sang childhood's pastimes and its joy,
Now for the jealous youth what joy!
Wherefore? She found a secret joy
Thus Nature doth our souls alloy,
The chaise long ordered please employ,
The feeble moment would espy
Light sallies without coxcombry,
She strains her throat to force a cry--
Of clarinet or flute doth cry:
I hear your harsh, reproachful cry.
Upon the windows tracery,
The clue unto some mystery
To be a charming mystery:
With ardent sighs and flattery
_Sed alia tempora_. And bravery
There dwells five versts from Krasnogory,
Here, drunk with his late victory,
Relate some ancient history."
That Nina's marble symmetry,
He feared the criminal might try
Will pass; the same to-morrow try--
Lapped in your Eastern luxury,
Must bow in common courtesy;
Is full of frigid jealousy,
Hope to conceal and jealousy,
Lead into good society,
Lest jaded with satiety,
With jealous fear, anxiety.
Upon its damp opacity,
This, this were true felicity!
Of Russian domesticity;
Yet with a feigned frigidity
(Nonsense and pure absurdity,
Like him renouncing vanity,
Of old maids the divinity,
Whom thirty centuries adore.I will with thy divinity
Passed into dull eternity,
Hears not my importunity!
The style of wise antiquity.
It carries of antiquity
Of kindly, dim antiquity,
With hope and then perplexity,
With us 'tis quite a novelty
Also my wretched liberty
The child of sloth and liberty.
Von Wisine, friend of liberty,
Idolatry of liberty,
I thought--retirement, liberty,
Thou too farewell, my liberty!
Of tender years the modesty
